Title: Eco-SoC: A Sustainable VLSI Architecture for Energy-Proportional Artificial Intelligence

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.08761v1

Published Time: Tue, 11 Aug 2026 01:25:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# Eco-SoC: A Sustainable VLSI Architecture for Energy-Proportional Artificial Intelligence 

JATIN CHOPRA, Microsoft Corporation, USA and Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India In an era defined by escalating climate change and the pervasive deployment of edge intelligence, the environmental cost of semiconductor manufacturing and operation has reached a critical threshold. As Deep Learning (DL) accelerators dominate System-on-Chip (SoC) die area, achieving true sustainability requires a paradigm shift from static worst-case efficiency to dynamic energy-proportionality. This paper introduces Eco-SoC, a highly scalable VLSI architecture co-designed specifically for sustainable artificial intelligence. We propose a hardware-level Dynamic Precision-Scaling Logic (DPSL) framework that adaptively modulates bit-width precision based on real-time activation sparsity, successfully reducing switching activity by up to 42% on a commercial 7nm FinFET process node. Furthermore, we transcend traditional Power-Performance-Area (PPA) metrics by providing a compre-hensive Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) using the Architectural Carbon footprint Tool (ACT). Our synthesis demonstrates that Eco-SoC offsets its increased embodied carbon footprint (a marginal 4.8% area overhead) within 1.1 years of edge deployment. Finally, by introducing a thermal-aware power gating mechanism that mitigates localized hotspots, Eco-SoC doubles the projected Mean Time To Failure (MTTF) of the silicon, providing a tangible, scalable strategy for electronic waste (e-waste) mitigation in next-generation computing systems. CCS Concepts: • Hardware → Hardware-software codesign ; Energy-aware computing ; Power estima-tion and optimization ; Self-optimizing adaptive processors .Additional Key Words and Phrases: VLSI Design, Sustainability, Green Computing, Low-Power SoC, Life Cycle Assessment, Carbon Footprint, Thermal-Aware Design, Electronic Design Automation (EDA) 

1 Introduction 

The rapid proliferation of edge Artificial Intelligence (AI) and the integration of deep learning micro-accelerators into smart infrastructure have catalyzed unprecedented demand for computational density. However, this growth trajectory has exposed a severe environmental vulnerability within the semiconductor industry. Modern Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) systems present a dual sustainability challenge: an escalating demand for operational energy to train and infer complex neural networks, and a massively growing "embodied" carbon footprint resulting from the resource-intensive manufacturing of advanced sub-10nm fabrication nodes [4, 5]. Historically, Electronic Design Automation (EDA) flows and computer architecture research have been ruthlessly optimized for Power, Performance, and Area (PPA) [6]. While maximizing performance-per-watt remains critical, the global mandate for a "Sustainable World" requires a holistic view of the device lifecycle. High-performance Systems-on-Chip (SoCs) frequently operate at peak dynamic power regardless of task complexity, leading to severe energy waste. Furthermore, this static power consumption accelerates thermal degradation, precipitating premature device failure and exacerbating the global electronic waste (e-waste) crisis [9, 10]. To address the escalating climate impact of semiconductor technologies, VLSI architectures must transition from static power-efficiency to dynamic energy-proportionality . A system is energy-proportional if its power consumption scales strictly in alignment with the computational criticality and precision requirements of the immediate workload [2]. While software-level approximate computing and network quantization (e.g., INT8/INT4 weight clipping) have shown promise in reducing model sizes, these algorithmic gains frequently fail to translate into silicon-level energy  

> Author’s Contact Information: Jatin Chopra, jatin27chopra@gmail.com, Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, Washington, USA and Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi, India. arXiv:2608.08761v1 [cs.AR] 9 Aug 2026 1:2 Jatin Chopra

reductions because the underlying multiplier-accumulator (MAC) arrays remain statically wired for worst-case, maximum-precision execution [11]. To bridge this critical gap between algorithmic sparsity and hardware efficiency, this paper introduces Eco-SoC , a highly scalable VLSI architecture co-designed to minimize both operational greenhouse gas emissions ( 𝐶𝑂 2𝑒 ) and embodied electronic waste. By intervening directly at the Register-Transfer Level (RTL) and clock-tree synthesis stages, Eco-SoC dynamically scales its active logic based on real-time activation data. 

1.1 Primary Contributions 

This expanded study provides a comprehensive end-to-end evaluation of sustainable VLSI design, extending from theoretical algorithmic sparsity down to physical 7nm tape-out synthesis. The primary contributions of this work are: 

• Dynamic Precision-Scaling Logic (DPSL): We design and implement a novel hardware-level gating architecture that monitors activation sparsity in real-time. By dynamically clock-gating the lower significant bits of the systolic MAC array during low-precision inferencing, we demonstrate a 42% reduction in dynamic switching activity ( 𝛼 ) compared to traditional static INT8 accelerators. 

• Thermal-Aware Power Profiling: We introduce a hardware-managed thermal feedback loop that forces precision down-scaling when junction temperatures ( 𝑇 𝑗 ) cross sustainable thresholds, actively preventing thermal runaway in highly dense multicore edge environ-ments. 

• Comprehensive Life Cycle Assessment (LCA): Moving beyond traditional PPA, we evaluate the architecture using a cradle-to-grave carbon modeling framework. We provide mathematical formalization proving that the operational energy savings of Eco-SoC offset its increased embodied manufacturing carbon (a 4.8% die area overhead) within 1.1 years of standard deployment. 

• Reliability-Driven E-Waste Mitigation: By lowering the thermal envelope of the SoC, we utilize the Arrhenius physical failure models to project a 102% increase in Mean Time To Failure (MTTF), extending the device lifespan from 4.2 to 8.5 years and directly addressing the hardware replacement cycle that drives global e-waste. 

2 Background and Related Work 

The pursuit of sustainability in computing systems has historically been confined to the domain of data center power usage effectiveness (PUE) and operational energy reduction. However, the slowing of Moore’s Law and the definitive end of Dennard Scaling have shifted the environmental bottleneck from the software and operational levels directly into the semiconductor manufacturing process [3]. Designing for a "Sustainable World" now requires a multi-objective optimization problem that treats carbon emissions and device longevity as primary constraints alongside Power, Performance, and Area (PPA). 

2.1 The Environmental Footprint of Advanced VLSI Nodes 

The environmental impact of computing hardware is broadly categorized into two phases: Opera-tional Carbon (emissions generated from electricity consumed during the device’s active lifetime) and Embodied Carbon (emissions generated during silicon mining, wafer fabrication, packaging, and distribution). Historically, operational energy dominated the footprint of computing devices. However, as fabrication technologies have advanced to extreme ultraviolet (EUV) lithography for sub-10nm Eco-SoC: A Sustainable VLSI Architecture for Energy-Proportional Artificial Intelligence 1:3 

FinFET and Gate-All-Around (GAA) nodes, the energy and water intensity required to manufacture a single 𝑚𝑚 2 of silicon has skyrocketed. Recent Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) studies, notably the ACT (Architectural Carbon footprint Tool) framework introduced by Gupta et al., reveal that for mobile, edge, and consumer SoCs, embodied carbon can now account for up to 70–80% of the device’s total lifetime emissions [5]. Consequently, the Semiconductor Sustainability Roadmap targets net-zero fabrication by 2030, but achieving this requires VLSI architects to design hardware that maximizes its operational lifespan to amortize the massive initial embodied carbon cost [4, 7]. 

2.2 Limitations of Static Approximate Computing in Green AI 

Artificial Intelligence, particularly Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), is notoriously resource-intensive. To mitigate the energy overhead of edge AI inferencing, the industry has widely adopted Approxi-mate Computing and model quantization [11]. Frameworks routinely compress 32-bit floating-point (FP32) weights down to 8-bit integers (INT8) or even 4-bit (INT4) representations with negligible loss in inference accuracy. However, a critical misalignment exists between algorithmic quantization and silicon execution. Standard DL accelerators and systolic arrays are synthesized with statically sized Multiplier-Accumulator (MAC) units. If a software model dynamically drops to 4-bit precision due to activation sparsity, a standard 8-bit MAC unit will still toggle its clock tree and registers for the upper zero-padded bits. This phenomenon results in unnecessary dynamic switching activity ( 𝛼 ), wasting operational energy [8]. While some state-of-the-art architectures implement zero-skipping (clock-gating MACs entirely when an activation is exactly zero), very few can dynamically scale their bit-width at runtime to match fluctuating precision requirements without incurring prohibitive area overheads for the control logic [1]. Eco-SoC addresses this precise limitation through its hardware-software co-designed Dynamic Precision-Scaling Logic (DPSL). 

2.3 Thermal Degradation, Reliability, and Electronic Waste 

Beyond immediate energy consumption, the thermal profile of an SoC is the primary determinant of its physical lifespan. High-density DL accelerators generate intense, localized thermal hotspots. Sustained high junction temperatures ( 𝑇 𝑗 ) accelerate physical failure mechanisms in silicon, in-cluding Time-Dependent Dielectric Breakdown (TDDB), Electromigration (EM), and Negative Bias Temperature Instability (NBTI) [9, 10]. When edge AI devices fail prematurely due to thermal degradation, they are discarded, directly contributing to the global electronic waste (e-waste) crisis—one of the fastest-growing waste streams worldwide. Therefore, enhancing the Mean Time To Failure (MTTF) of VLSI systems is not merely a reliability engineering goal; it is a fundamental sustainability metric. By actively managing the thermal envelope through precision scaling, Eco-SoC defers hardware replacement cycles, significantly reducing the annualized embodied carbon footprint of the deployed infrastructure. 

3 Hardware Architecture: Eco-SoC Microarchitecture 

To achieve true energy-proportionality, the Eco-SoC architecture shifts the paradigm of approximate computing from software-level algorithmic quantization to hardware-level dynamic switching mitigation. The core philosophy is to aggressively minimize the toggling of internal capacitive nodes within the datapath whenever high-precision arithmetic is mathematically redundant. 1:4 Jatin Chopra 

On-Chip SRAM Buffer (Activations & Weights) Leading Zero Detector (LZD) Ring Oscillator Thermal Sensor ( 𝑇 𝑗 )DPSL Controller (FSM) TAPG Controller (Thermal Throttle) 

Systolic MAC Array (Clock Gated) 

MAC 0 (INT4/8) MAC 1 (INT4/8) MAC 2 (INT4/8) MAC 3 (INT4/8) Activation Stream Sparsity Flag Freq ∝ 𝑇 𝑗 

Override 

Clock Enable ( 𝐸𝑁 ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ , 𝐸𝑁 𝑙𝑜𝑤 ) routed to ICG Cells 

Fig. 1. Eco-SoC Microarchitecture. The DPSL monitors activation sparsity via Leading Zero Detectors (LZD), while the TAPG overrides precision scaling to maintain safe thermal envelopes, selectively clock-gating the Systolic MAC array. 

3.1 Mathematical Power Optimization Strategy 

The total power consumption of a CMOS-based VLSI system is the sum of its dynamic and static (leakage) power components: 

𝑃 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 = 𝑃 𝑑𝑦𝑛 + 𝑃 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡 = (𝛼 · 𝐶 𝑒 𝑓 𝑓 · 𝑉 2 

> 𝑑𝑑

· 𝑓 ) + ( 𝑉 𝑑𝑑 · 𝐼 𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑘 ) (1) where 𝛼 is the switching activity factor (the probability of a node transitioning from 0 → 1 or 1 → 0), 𝐶 𝑒 𝑓 𝑓 is the effective switched capacitance, 𝑉 𝑑𝑑 is the supply voltage, 𝑓 is the clock frequency, and 𝐼 𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑘 represents sub-threshold and gate-oxide leakage currents. While traditional low-power techniques like Dynamic Voltage and Frequency Scaling (DVFS) aggressively target 𝑉 𝑑𝑑 and 𝑓 , DVFS suffers from high latency penalties during voltage transitions and is often too coarse-grained for the microsecond-level fluctuations of AI inferencing. Eco-SoC, instead, directly targets the switching activity factor ( 𝛼 ) and the effective capacitance ( 𝐶 𝑒 𝑓 𝑓 ) at the clock-tree level through a novel technique we define as Dynamic Precision-Scaling Logic (DPSL). 

3.2 Dynamic Precision-Scaling Logic (DPSL) 

The primary computational engine of Eco-SoC is a highly parallelized 2D systolic array of Multiplier-Accumulators (MACs), natively designed for INT8 precision. In standard AI accelerators, processing an activation that requires only 4 bits of precision still results in the clocking of all 8-bit registers and the full combinational toggling of the 8-bit multiplier tree, resulting in massive parasitic power waste. Eco-SoC introduces the DPSL controller, a lightweight Finite State Machine (FSM) integrated directly into the dispatch queue of the systolic array. The DPSL executes a two-stage pipeline: Eco-SoC: A Sustainable VLSI Architecture for Energy-Proportional Artificial Intelligence 1:5 

(1) Sparsity Detection: During the memory fetch cycle, leading zero detectors (LZDs) rapidly profile the incoming activation tensor map. If a contiguous block of activations can be mathematically represented in INT4 without overflowing, a scale_down flag is asserted. (2) Granular Clock Gating: The scale_down flag triggers Integrated Clock Gating (ICG) cells specifically attached to the upper four bits of the operands in the MAC units. By de-asserting the clock enable (EN) signal for these specific flip-flops, the DPSL physically prevents the inputs from toggling. Because the combinational logic of the multiplier tree is decoupled from transitioning inputs, the switching activity ( 𝛼 ) for the gated paths drops to absolute zero. Our RTL synthesis confirms that while the DPSL controller introduces a 4.8% area overhead for the LZDs and control routing, it successfully reduces the aggregate dynamic power of the systolic array by 42% under standard sparse AI workloads (e.g., pruned ResNet-50 models). 

Algorithm 1 Eco-SoC: Hardware-Managed DPSL and TAPG Execution 

Input: Activation Vector 𝐴 , Weight Matrix 𝑊 , Junction Temp 𝑇 𝑗 

Output: Clock Enable Signals for MAC Registers ( 𝐸𝑁 ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ , 𝐸𝑁 𝑙𝑜𝑤 ) 

> 1:

Initialize: 𝑇 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ ← 65 ◦𝐶 , 𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒 ← 𝐼 𝑁𝑇 8 

> 2:

loop  

> 3:

𝑇 𝑗 ← Read_Ring_Oscillator_Frequency()  

> 4:

if 𝑇 𝑗 ≥ 𝑇 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ then  

> 5:

𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒 ← 𝐼 𝑁𝑇 4 {Thermal override triggered}  

> 6:

Assert Thermal_Throttle_Interrupt  

> 7:

else  

> 8:

𝑍𝑒𝑟𝑜𝑠 ← Leading_Zero_Detect (𝐴 ) 

> 9:

if 𝑍𝑒𝑟𝑜𝑠 ≥ 4 and 𝑀𝑎𝑥 (𝑊 ) < 16 then  

> 10:

𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒 ← 𝐼 𝑁𝑇 4 {Activation sparsity detected}  

> 11:

else  

> 12:

𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒 ← 𝐼 𝑁𝑇 8 

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

end if  

> 15:

Execute Clock Gating:  

> 16:

if 𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒 == 𝐼 𝑁𝑇 4 then  

> 17:

𝐸𝑁 ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ ← 0 {Gate upper 4 bits of MAC}  

> 18:

𝐸𝑁 𝑙𝑜𝑤 ← 1 

> 19:

𝛼 𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟 ← 0 {Switching activity neutralized}  

> 20:

else  

> 21:

𝐸𝑁 ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ ← 1 

> 22:

𝐸𝑁 𝑙𝑜𝑤 ← 1 

> 23:

end if  

> 24:

Execute_Systolic_MAC (𝐴 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 ,𝑊 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 ) 

> 25:

end loop 

3.3 Hardware-Managed Thermal-Aware Power Gating (TAPG) 

Aggressive dynamic power reduction not only saves energy but directly modulates the thermal density of the silicon. To maximize device longevity and prevent the thermal runaway common in 1:6 Jatin Chopra 

FinFET nodes, Eco-SoC implements a hardware-managed Thermal-Aware Power Gating (TAPG) loop. We distribute lightweight Ring Oscillator (RO) based thermal sensors across the die, adjacent to the most computationally dense MAC clusters. The frequency of an RO is highly sensitive to the localized junction temperature ( 𝑇 𝑗 ). The TAPG controller continuously monitors the RO frequencies. If 𝑇 𝑗 approaches a predefined sustainability threshold (e.g., 65 ◦C), the TAPG overrides the software-defined precision requirements and forces the DPSL to scale down to INT4 or INT2 precision. By actively throttling precision in hardware—rather than relying on slow, OS-level DVFS interrupts—Eco-SoC instantly reduces the localized power density, allowing the silicon to cool. This mechanism guarantees that the SoC strictly adheres to a long-term thermal envelope, directly contributing to the exponential increase in the Mean Time To Failure (MTTF) modeled in Section 4. 

4 Sustainability Modeling and Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) 

While the Dynamic Precision-Scaling Logic (DPSL) significantly optimizes operational energy, a true evaluation of VLSI sustainability must encompass the entire device lifecycle. To quantify the environmental efficacy of Eco-SoC, we utilize a cradle-to-grave Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) methodology, heavily informed by the Architectural Carbon footprint Tool (ACT) framework [5]. We define the total environmental impact (in 𝑘𝑔𝐶𝑂 2𝑒 ) of an edge-deployed System-on-Chip as: 

𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑡 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 = 𝐶 𝑓 𝑎𝑏 +

> 𝐿𝑖 𝑓 𝑒

∑︁ 

> 𝑡 =0

 𝑃 𝑜𝑝𝑠 (𝑡 ) × 𝐶𝐼 (𝑡 ) + 𝐸 𝑤𝑎𝑠𝑡𝑒 (2) where 𝐶 𝑓 𝑎𝑏 represents the embodied carbon generated during the mining, wafer fabrication, and packaging phases; 𝑃 𝑜𝑝𝑠 (𝑡 ) is the dynamic operational power consumed at time 𝑡 ; 𝐶𝐼 (𝑡 ) is the Carbon Intensity of the local electrical grid (measured in 𝑔𝐶𝑂 2𝑒 /𝑘𝑊 ℎ ); and 𝐸 𝑤𝑎𝑠𝑡𝑒 represents the end-of-life environmental penalty of electronic waste disposal. 

4.1 The Carbon Payback Period for Silicon Area 

Advanced sub-10nm fabrication nodes (such as the 7nm FinFET process used for our synthesis) are highly carbon-intensive due to the prolonged usage of Extreme Ultraviolet (EUV) lithography and complex multi-patterning steps. As detailed in Section 3, the integration of DPSL control logic and thermal sensors introduces a 4.8% increase in silicon die area. Under traditional PPA paradigms, this area bloat would be viewed as a pure penalty. However, under the ACT framework, area increases are modeled as a localized increase in embodied carbon ( Δ𝐶 𝑓 𝑎𝑏 ). For the architecture to be classified as "sustainable," the operational energy savings ( Δ𝑃 𝑜𝑝𝑠 ) must amortize this initial carbon debt within the expected lifetime of the device. We define the Carbon Payback Period ( 𝑇 𝑝𝑎𝑦𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘 ) as the time required to achieve net-zero environmental impact relative to a baseline, static SoC: 

𝑇 𝑝𝑎𝑦𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘 = Δ𝐶 𝑓 𝑎𝑏 

 Δ𝑃 𝑜𝑝𝑠 × 𝐶𝐼 𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑑 

 × 𝐷𝑢𝑡𝑦𝐶𝑦𝑐𝑙𝑒 (3) Assuming a global average grid carbon intensity ( 𝐶𝐼 𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑑 ) of 475 gCO 2e/kWh and an active in-ferencing duty cycle of 20% for a standard edge-AI camera deployment, the 42% reduction in dynamic power provided by the DPSL generates massive operational carbon savings. Our LCA calculations demonstrate that Eco-SoC offsets its 4.8% area carbon penalty in just 𝑇 ≈ 14 months (1.1 years). Because the standard lifespan of consumer edge devices is 3 to 5 years, Eco-SoC provides a net-negative carbon delta for the majority of its deployment. Eco-SoC: A Sustainable VLSI Architecture for Energy-Proportional Artificial Intelligence 1:7 

4.2 Reliability as Sustainability: The E-Waste Mitigation Model 

The most direct method to reduce both embodied carbon ( 𝐶 𝑓 𝑎𝑏 ) and physical e-waste is to maximize the physical longevity of the silicon. As established in Section 3.3, Eco-SoC utilizes Thermal-Aware Power Gating (TAPG) to maintain strict junction temperatures ( 𝑇 𝑗 ≤ 65 ◦C). To mathematically quantify the sustainability benefit of this thermal management, we model the Mean Time To Failure (MTTF) of the interconnects and gate oxides using the established Arrhenius relationship: 

𝑀𝑇𝑇 𝐹 = 𝐴 · exp 

 𝐸 𝑎 

𝑘 𝐵 · 𝑇 𝑗 



(4) where 𝐴 is an empirical scaling constant dependent on the 7nm process geometry, 𝐸 𝑎 is the activation energy of the primary failure mechanism (e.g., 0 .7 eV for Electromigration), 𝑘 𝐵 is the Boltzmann constant (8 .617 × 10 −5 eV/K), and 𝑇 𝑗 is the absolute junction temperature in Kelvin. In a baseline SoC without dynamic precision scaling, sustained intensive AI workloads frequently push 𝑇 𝑗 to 85 ◦C (358 K). By actively throttling power density and maintaining a maximum 𝑇 𝑗 of 65 ◦C (338 K), Eco-SoC fundamentally alters the exponential decay curve of the silicon. Evaluating the Arrhenius equation yields: 

𝑀𝑇𝑇 𝐹 𝐸𝑐𝑜 

𝑀𝑇𝑇 𝐹 𝐵𝑎𝑠𝑒 

= exp 

 0.78.617 × 10 −5

 1338 − 1358 

 

≈ 2.02 (5) By keeping the silicon cooler, Eco-SoC effectively doubles (a 102.3% increase) the projected hardware lifespan from 4.2 years to 8.5 years. By deferring the replacement cycle, the annualized embodied carbon footprint of the edge device fleet is cut in half, representing a massive mitigation of global electronic waste. 

5 Experimental Evaluation and EDA Synthesis 

To validate the area, power, and timing (APT) impacts of the Dynamic Precision-Scaling Logic (DPSL) and the Thermal-Aware Power Gating (TAPG) mechanisms, we implemented the Eco-SoC architecture at the Register-Transfer Level (RTL) using SystemVerilog. 

5.1 Methodology and EDA Toolchain 

The baseline architecture and the proposed Eco-SoC were synthesized using the Synopsys Design Compiler. We targeted a predictive 7nm FinFET standard cell library characterized at a nominal supply voltage of 0 .7V and a standard operating temperature of 25 ◦C. To accurately capture the dynamic switching activity ( 𝛼 ), we simulated the post-synthesis netlist using Mentor Graphics ModelSim. We drove the simulation with real-world activation maps extracted from quantized and pruned ResNet-50 and MobileNetV2 models processing the ImageNet dataset. The resulting Value Change Dump (VCD) files were fed into Synopsys PrimeTime PX for high-fidelity vector-driven power analysis. 

5.2 Area, Power, and Timing (APT) Analysis 

The integration of the DPSL finite state machines, leading zero detectors (LZDs), and the distributed Ring Oscillator thermal sensors inherently introduces hardware overhead. Our synthesis results, detailed in Table 1, indicate that Eco-SoC requires a total die area of 1 .31 mm 2 for the accelerator core, representing a marginal 4.8% area penalty compared to the statically wired baseline (1 .25 mm 2). Furthermore, the insertion of Integrated Clock Gating (ICG) cells in the data paths introduces a slight setup-time penalty. However, by leveraging the fast switching characteristics of the 7nm 1:8 Jatin Chopra 

FinFET node, Eco-SoC maintains the target clock frequency of 1 .2 GHz without violating critical path timing constraints. 

> Table 1. APT and Sustainability Metrics Synthesis (7nm FinFET, 1.2 GHz, 0.7V)

Evaluation Metric Baseline Static SoC Eco-SoC (DPSL + TAPG) Relative Improvemen 

Dynamic Power ( 𝑃 𝑑𝑦𝑛 ) 450.2 mW 261.1 mW 42.0% Reduction 

Static Leakage ( 𝑃 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡 ) 42.5 mW 44.8 mW -5.4% (Penalty) Total Die Area 1.25 mm 2 1.31 mm 2 -4.8% (Penalty) Target Clock Frequency 1.2 GHz 1.2 GHz 0.0% (Maintained) Energy-Delay Product (EDP) 1.00 × (Normalized) 0.62 × 38.0% Improvement 

Carbon Payback Period N/A (Net Positive) 1.1 Years Offset Achieved 

Mean Time To Failure (MTTF) 4.2 Years 8.5 Years 102.3% Extension 

As demonstrated in Table 1, the 42% reduction in dynamic power overwhelmingly compensates for the 5.4% increase in static leakage caused by the additional DPSL logic gates. The overarching Energy-Delay Product (EDP), a critical metric for evaluating hardware efficiency, improves by 38% across standard inference workloads. 

5.3 Workload-Specific Power Profiling 

To prove the dynamic adaptability of the Eco-SoC architecture, we profiled the dynamic power consumption across three distinct Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) topologies: ResNet-50, MobileNetV2, and VGG-16. Because the Dynamic Precision-Scaling Logic (DPSL) relies on activation sparsity, models utilizing aggressive ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit) activation functions inherently trigger deeper clock-gating. ResNet-50 MobileNetV2 VGG-16 0200 400 600 450 310 520 261 165 380 Dynamic Power (mW) Baseline Static SoC Eco-SoC (DPSL Active)  

> Fig. 2. Dynamic power consumption across standard vision workloads. MobileNetV2 exhibits the highest relative power savings (46.7%) due to its highly sparse depthwise separable convolutions, which the DPSL efficiently down-scales to INT4. Eco-SoC: A Sustainable VLSI Architecture for Energy-Proportional Artificial Intelligence 1:9

As illustrated in Figure 2, MobileNetV2 achieves the highest relative power savings. Its reliance on depthwise separable convolutions generates highly sparse activation maps, allowing the DPSL controller to aggressively clamp the upper 4 bits of the MAC registers for over 70% of the inference cycle. 

6 Conclusion 

The era of optimizing VLSI architectures strictly for peak performance without regard for envi-ronmental impact is no longer tenable. As edge AI deployments scale globally, the semiconductor industry must address both operational energy consumption and the massive embodied carbon footprint of sub-10nm fabrication. This paper introduces Eco-SoC, an architecture co-designed for sustainable artificial intelligence. By shifting from static execution to dynamic energy-proportionality, our hardware-level Dynamic Precision-Scaling Logic (DPSL) mitigates unnecessary switching capacitance, reducing operational dynamic power by 42%. Through a rigorous Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) utilizing the ACT frame-work, we mathematically prove that these operational savings completely offset the embodied carbon of the 4.8% silicon area overhead within just 1.1 years. Finally, by managing the thermal envelope in real-time, Eco-SoC doubles the physical lifespan of the silicon, providing a highly scalable, immediate solution for reducing global electronic waste. 

Acknowledgments 

The authors disclose that generative AI models were utilized during the preparation of this manu-script to assist with LaTeX formatting, bibliography structuring, and technical prose refinement. The final architectural designs, mathematical models, and technical conclusions remain the sole intellectual responsibility of the human authors. 

References