Title: Physical Design of UET-RVMCU: A Streamlined Open-Source RISC-V Microcontroller

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.28709v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 02:28:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 5

Markdown Content:
# Physical Design of UET-RVMCU: A Streamlined Open-Source RISC-V Microcontroller 

Abdullah Azhar, Uneeb Kamal, Wajid Ali, Saad Gillani, Dr. Suleman Sami Qazi 

Department of Electrical Engineering University of Engineering and Technology, Lahore, Pakistan 

{2021ee61, 2021ee81, 2021ee79, 2021ee118 }@student.uet.edu.pk, suleman.qazi@uet.edu.pk 

Abstract —This paper presents the design and physical im-plementation of UET-RVMCU, a lightweight RISC-V micro-controller derived from the UETRV-PCore. Aimed at creating an accessible and flexible open-source RISC-V-based microcon-troller, UET-RVMCU simplifies the application-class UETRV-PCore by reducing pipeline stages, removing MMU functionality, and integrating GPIO peripherals. The final GDSII layout was generated using an open-source RTL-to-GDS flow (OpenLane). This project demonstrates the feasibility of transforming an application-class SoC into a feature-rich microcontroller suitable for embedded systems, emphasizing low area, design simplicity, and open-source development. 

Index Terms —RISC-V, Microcontroller, Open-Source Hard-ware, Physical Design, RTL-to-GDSII, OpenLane, Embedded Systems 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

The evolution of computing demands increasingly efficient, customizable, and cost-effective hardware solutions. Tradi-tional proprietary instruction set architectures (ISAs) often impose limitations due to licensing costs and restricted ac-cessibility. In contrast, RISC-V emerges as a transformative open-source ISA, offering a modular and extensible framework that empowers designers to develop tailored processors across a spectrum of applications—from embedded systems to high-performance computing. RISC-V’s open nature fosters innovation by eliminating licensing barriers, thereby accelerating research and devel-opment in both academia and industry. Its simplified design principles facilitate easier implementation and verification processes, making it an ideal choice for educational purposes and experimental architectures. Leveraging the advantages of RISC-V, the UET-RVMCU project aims to design and implement a streamlined 32-bit microcontroller unit (MCU) tailored for educational and research applications. This MCU integrates essential periph-erals and adheres to the RV32IMA instruction set, balancing performance with resource efficiency. The project’s objective is to provide a practical platform for exploring processor design, embedded system development, and hardware-software co-design methodologies. To realize the physical design of the UET-RVMCU, we employ OpenLane, an open-source digital ASIC implemen-tation flow built upon tools primarily from the OpenROAD, 

> This work was conducted as part of the undergraduate research at the University of Engineering and Technology, Lahore.

YosysHQ, and Open Circuit Design projects. OpenLane de-fines a complete RTL-to-GDSII flow by integrating these tools with a series of custom scripts and utilities that address compatibility and methodology gaps. Initially, OpenROAD tools operated independently, each with its own infrastructure and interfaces. While this modular design followed the UNIX philosophy of doing one thing well, the fragmentation in-creased I/O overhead during iterative passes, reducing overall efficiency. To address this, a shared physical data model OpenDB was introduced, enabling seamless data exchange between tools and significantly reducing file I/O costs. This unification allowed the development of custom tools within OpenLane that facilitate end-to-end automation of digital ASIC design. OpenLane supports two major workflows: hardening RTL designs into soft macros, and integrating those macros into a complete system-on-chip (SoC) layout. The flow has been successfully used to tape out a family of RISC-V-based SoCs known as striVe, demonstrating its reliability and capability for real-world chip fabrication. This paper presents a comprehensive experience report on utilizing OpenLane for the physical design of the UET-RVMCU. We detail the end-to-end design flow, highlight challenges encountered during implementation, and discuss the solutions adopted to overcome them. Our findings aim to contribute to the collective knowledge of open-source hardware design and serve as a reference for future endeavors in the field. Macro hardening refers to the process of transforming a synthesized RTL design into a physical layout block (also called a ”hardened macro”) that can be integrated into a larger chip. In OpenLane, this involves going through the full ASIC implementation flow—including synthesis, floor-planning, placement, clock tree synthesis, routing, and signoff steps such as design rule checking (DRC) and layout versus schematic (LVS) verification. The resulting hardened macro is a standalone, manufacturable layout block (typically in GDSII format) with well-defined power, ground, and I/O boundaries. This hardened macro can then be reused or instantiated in more complex SoCs, enabling hierarchical chip design. Macro hardening is especially useful for modular design approaches, where validated building blocks are integrated into larger systems. 

> arXiv:2603.28709v1 [cs.AR] 30 Mar 2026

II. A RCHITECTURE OVERVIEW OF UET-RVMCU 

A. Pipeline Reduction 

The UET-RVMCU adopts a simplified 3-stage pipeline architecture, consisting of Fetch, Decode/Execute, and Write-back stages. This reduction from a more complex pipeline structure decreases control logic overhead and silicon area, making it ideal for low-power, resource-constrained embedded environments. The streamlined pipeline also facilitates easier debugging and analysis for educational purposes. 

B. Privilege Modes 

In alignment with microcontroller requirements, the UET-RVMCU supports only the Machine (M) mode. The exclusion of Supervisor and User privilege modes reduces hardware complexity and software overhead, while still maintaining sufficient control and configurability for embedded system applications. 

C. Memory Management 

To further reduce design complexity and enhance deter-minism, the UET-RVMCU omits the Memory Management Unit (MMU) and virtual memory support. The processor operates under a flat memory model, which simplifies address translation and access control, thereby improving real-time responsiveness. 

D. Memory Architecture 

The memory system incorporates four block memories, each supporting byte-addressable access. This structure enables efficient separation of code and data memory while offering flexibility in memory allocation. The memory blocks are particularly suited for small-footprint applications and provide sufficient capacity for a range of educational and research scenarios. That being said this separation does result in a larger footprint, primarily due to the extra space required for routing of the separate I/O ports for each bank. 

E. Peripheral Enhancements 

The UET-RVMCU includes a comprehensive set of pe-ripherals designed to support typical microcontroller tasks. It provides three general-purpose I/O ports—Ports A, B, and C—with each port featuring 8 pins. These I/O lines can be configured for input or output operation. Additionally, the MCU supports configurable level-sensitive interrupts, enabling rapid response to external events. A GP-Special peripheral module is also integrated to drive 16 LEDs and read from 16 switches, simplifying hands-on experiments and lab exercises. 

F. Instruction Set Extensions 

The MCU extends the base RV32IMA instruction set by in-corporating the Bitmanip extension, specifically the Zba, Zbb, Zbc, and Zbs subsets. These extensions enhance performance for bit-level operations common in embedded control, signal processing, and data encoding. Although not yet implemented, floating-point instruction support is planned in future versions to accommodate applications requiring higher numerical pre-cision. 

G. Debug Support 

To aid in development and system analysis, the UET-RVMCU features built-in debug and trace capabilities. These allow real-time monitoring of internal processor states, support for breakpoints, single-step execution, and program tracing. Such features are invaluable for both educational purposes and professional embedded system debugging.  

> Fig. 1. Block diagram of the UET-RV Microcontroller Unit (MCU).

III. P HYSICAL DESIGN METHODOLOGY 

A. RTL-to-GDSII Flow 

The physical design of the UET-RVMCU was carried out using the OpenLane toolchain, which provides a complete RTL-to-GDSII flow. The entire flow was based on the open-source Skywater 130nm Process Development Kit (PDK). This methodology allowed us to take the Verilog RTL of our microcontroller design and convert it into a layout-ready GDSII file, suitable for manufacturing. The flow consists of several key stages: 

1) Synthesis: Yosys, an open-source logic synthesis tool, was employed to convert the RTL design into a gate-level netlist. This phase includes optional synthesis exploration to evaluate different area and timing trade-offs. Four default strategies were available to explore the synthesis space. Each strategy was assessed using static timing analysis (STA) to determine optimal results, visualized via an HTML dashboard. 

2) Floorplanning: The floorplanning stage used fixed con-straints inherited from the Caravel-mini framework. The macro hardening approach guided this stage, allowing us to de-fine precise physical boundaries and pin placements. Custom I/O pin placements were supported, and contextualized I/O placement was used during SoC-level integration to optimize routing. 3) Placement: This phase included both global and detailed placement using tools integrated from the OpenROAD project. The placer positioned standard cells while considering routing congestion and timing requirements. Post-placement optimiza-tions were done using OpenPhySyn, and Clock Tree Synthesis (CTS) was executed to meet timing constraints. 

4) Routing: Routing was limited to the Metal-3 layer due to Power Delivery Network (PDN) constraints. The router gen-erated the physical interconnect between cells while ensuring DRC-clean routes. Diode insertion was also done at this stage to prevent antenna effects. 

5) GDSII Generation: The final layout was generated using Magic, and GDSII views were produced. KLayout was used to visualize the generated layout. LEF views were also created to support hierarchical design integration. 

6) Post-routing Evaluation: Post-routing checks included Design Rule Checking (DRC) and Layout Versus Schematic (LVS) verification using Magic and Netgen. Antenna rule checks were performed via OpenROAD’s ARC or Magic. Parasitic extraction using SPEF EXTRACTOR followed, and the extracted data was fed back into STA for accurate timing reports. 

B. OpenLANE Infrastructure and Tooling 

OpenLANE is a wrapper framework that integrates tools from OpenROAD, YosysHQ, and Open Circuit Design. The project began in 2019 when most tools were standalone. Open-LANE adopted a more cohesive infrastructure using OpenDB, which allowed a shared physical data model among tools, reducing file I/O overheads and improving iteration efficiency. Custom tools and utilities built on OpenDB supplemented standard tools to fill in compatibility and methodology gaps. As a result, OpenLANE supported:  

> •

Hardening designs into soft macros (RTL to GDSII for modules).  

> •

Integration of macros into complete SoC designs.  

> •

Support for fully automated and custom interactive flows. The ability to re-harden macros with fixed interfaces made the top-down design methodology viable. Additionally, strict I/O placement specifications allowed for reusable and easily upgradable macros. OpenLANE was instrumental in success-fully taping out various RISC-V based SoCs like striVe, show-casing its viability in both academic and industrial contexts. 

C. Summary 

The combination of OpenLane, the Skywater 130nm PDK, and open-source tools enabled a robust and fully open-source physical design flow. From RTL synthesis to layout genera-tion, and all the way through verification, this methodology provides a replicable, cost-effective pipeline for academic and pre-production silicon design efforts. 

D. Module Integration 

Each SoC component was modularized during floorplan-ning. The dimensions of each module are listed below:                           

> TABLE I MODULE DIMENSIONS
> Module Dimensions ( μm)
> Core 700 ×700 Memory 1200 ×1200 DBus 200 ×1200 CLINT 200 ×100 PLIC 100 ×100 GPIO 200 ×200 UART 200 ×200 SPI 200 ×250

IV. I MPLEMENTATION CHALLENGES 

A. Synthesis-Level Constraint with Yosys 

During the physical design implementation using Open-Lane, one of the major roadblocks encountered was during the synthesis stage, which internally uses Yosys for hardware description language (HDL) synthesis. Yosys imposes specific syntactic constraints on how reset logic is described. Notably, it does not permit combining the asynchronous reset condition with other signal-based conditions in a single if statement within an always block sensitive to multiple edges. For instance, take a look at the following:                  

> always @(posedge clk or posedge rst) begin if (rst || enable) begin data_out <= 0; end else begin data_out <= data_in; end end
> Listing 1. Un-Synthesizable Verilog for an asynchronous reset.

This will results in the synthesis error:       

> ERROR: Multiple edge sensitive events found for this signal!

This is because Yosys interprets such a condition as a multiple-edge sensitivity problem, which is not supported in its synthesis flow. Even though conceptually the reset and logic signals may seem compatible in a combined condition, Yosys requires that the reset condition be handled independently to avoid ambiguity during synthesis. The correct approach is to separate the reset logic into its own exclusive if clause, as shown below:                              

> // Correct: reset handled in aseparate // conditional block
> always @(posedge clk or posedge rst) begin if (rst) begin data_out <= 0; end else if (enable) begin data_out <= data_in; end else begin data_out <= data_out; end end
> Listing 2. Synthesizable Verilog for an asynchronous reset.

This structure ensures that the reset condition is evaluated independently before any other signals, thus complying with Yosys’s requirements and avoiding synthesis errors. This de-bugging insight proved crucial for progressing past synthesis and moving forward to placement and routing. 

B. Floorplanning and Congestion During Placement 

Another challenge was encountered in subsequent stages, particularly during floorplanning and standard cell placement. OpenLane’s automated flow can sometimes result in uneven cell distribution or congestion hotspots, especially when the design includes modules with irregular aspect ratios or high interconnectivity. In such cases, the global placement engine may struggle to minimize wirelength and timing violations simultaneously. To address this, manual intervention was required in the form of floorplanning constraint tuning. This in-volved explicitly defining core utilization, adjusting the die area, and experimenting with different aspect ratios us-ing the floorplan.tcl configuration file. Additionally, pin placements had to be refined using macros such as 

place_io.tcl to avoid overlap and improve routability. These iterative adjustments were necessary to ensure that the downstream stages—global routing, detailed routing, and timing analysis—could proceed without violating design rules or timing constraints. Such manual tuning underscored the importance of understanding both the automated flow and the levers available for optimization in the OpenLane toolchain. 

C. Memory Integration Challenges 

Despite the benefits of using separate memory banks for parallelism and modular access, their integration introduced significant complications in our area-constrained design. Each bank had individual read and write ports, which caused severe routing congestion. The numerous input/output pins associated with each memory instance led to overlapping routes and dif-ficulty in achieving Design Rule Check (DRC) clean routing. The challenge was compounded during global and detailed routing stages, where the tool struggled to find legal paths around the densely connected ports. In future iterations, the use of a shared port memory or serialized access logic may be considered to mitigate this issue. 

D. Manual Macro Placement Using Inkscape 

Macro placement also presented difficulties. Initially, we relied entirely on scripted placement provided by OpenLane. However, we discovered that automated placement often led to suboptimal macro distribution and alignment, contributing to routing congestion and poor utilization. To resolve this, we turned to a manual macro placement strategy using Inkscape, a graphical design tool. We visually designed the macro floorplan layout, ensuring adequate spac-ing and alignment. Once finalized, we extracted the coordinate information from the Inkscape layout and translated it into the macro placement configuration file required by OpenLane. This hands-on approach gave us finer control over the floorplan and significantly improved routability. 

E. Routing Congestion and Area Utilization 

After macro placements were finalized and the flow was re-run, we encountered significant routing congestion in specific regions. This was verified using the routing heatmap provided by the OpenROAD GUI, which revealed that several areas experienced high congestion while other parts of the die were underutilized. Interestingly, regions we had intentionally left open for routing were not being effectively used by the tool. This suggested suboptimal routing behavior or a need for better guidance. To mitigate this, we iteratively updated the macro layout in Inkscape, reallocating space and adjusting positions to balance congestion. After multiple refinements, we observed substantial improvement in route quality and a more even distribution of routing resources across the die. V. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

The final GDSII layout was successfully generated within the 4 mm 2 area constraint. The design’s modular nature allows for easy integration of additional peripherals, supporting future scalability. This project highlights the experience of using a fully open-source EDA toolchain, making it ideal for education and proto-typing. The micro-controller is simple yet functional, offering value for student learning and basic embedded applications. However, the design currently lacks integrated SRAM and does not yet include a floating-point unit or debug support, which are planned for future improvements.  

> Fig. 2. Final GDSII layout of the SoC

VI. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

The UET-RVMCU demonstrates a successful open-source implementation of a lightweight RISC-V microcontroller de-rived from an application-class processor. Its simplified ar-chitecture supports compact embedded designs. Future work includes adding floating-point hardware support, enabling full debug and trace capabilities, and evaluating silicon perfor-mance post-fabrication through shuttle runs. There is also the prospect of adding a vector coprocessor to enable low-power, edge AI applications. REFERENCES [1] UET-RVMCU GitHub Repository. [Online]. Available: https://github. com/meds-uet/UET-RVMCU/ [2] UETRV-PCore GitHub Repository. [Online]. Available: https://github. com/ee-uet/UETRV-PCore [3] OpenLane Documentation. [Online]. Available: https://openlane2. readthedocs.io/en/latest/ [4] Cadence Genus Synthesis Solution. [Online]. Available: https://www.cadence.com/en US/home/tools/digital-design-and-signoff/ synthesis/genus-synthesis-solution.html [5] SkyWater PDK, “SkyWater SKY130 PDK,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://skywater-pdk.readthedocs.io [6] Efabless Corp., “OpenLANE,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://github. com/efabless/openlane [7] T. Ajayi et al., “OpenROAD: Toward a Self-Driving, Open-Source Digital Layout Implementation Tool Chain,” in Proc. Government Mi-crocircuit Applications and Critical Technology Conference , 2019, pp. 1105–1110. [8] C. Wolf and J. Glaser, “Yosys – A Free Verilog Synthesis Suite,” in 

Proc. 21st Austrian Workshop on Microelectronics (Austrochip) , 2013. [9] T. Spyrou, “OpenDB, OpenROAD’s Database,” in Proc. Workshop on Open-Source EDA Technology (WOSET) , 2019. [10] M. Gaber, M. Abdelatty, and M. Shalan, “Fault, an Open Source DFT Toolchain,” in Proc. Workshop on Open-Source EDA Technology (WOSET) , 2019. [11] A. Agiza and S. Reda, “OpenPhySyn: An Open-Source Physical Syn-thesis Optimization Toolkit,” in Proc. 2020 Workshop on Open-Source EDA Technology (WOSET) , 2020. [12] R. T. Edwards, “Magic VLSI Layout Tool,” Open Circuit Design, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/RTimothyEdwards/magic [13] R. T. Edwards, “NETGEN,” Open Circuit Design, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/RTimothyEdwards/netgen