Title: Ensuring Data Freshness in Multi-Rate Task Chains Scheduling

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.09738v1

Published Time: Wed, 11 Mar 2026 01:11:48 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# Ensuring Data Freshness in Multi-Rate Task Chains Scheduling 

1st Jos´ e Luis Conradi Hoffmann 2nd Antˆ onio Augusto Fr¨ ohlich 

Software/Hardware Integration Lab, Federal University of Santa Catarina Florian´ opolis, Brazil 

{hoffmann, guto }@lisha.ufsc.br 

Abstract —In safety-critical autonomous systems, data fresh-ness presents a fundamental design challenge. While the Logical Execution Time (LET) paradigm ensures compositional deter-minism, it often does so at the cost of injected latency, degrading the phase margin of high-frequency control loops. Furthermore, mapping heterogeneous, multi-rate sensor fusion requirements onto rigid task-centric schedules typically implies in resource-inefficient oversampling. This paper proposes a Task-based scheduling framework extended with data freshness constraints. Unlike traditional models, scheduling decisions are driven by the lifespan of data. We introduce task offset based on the data freshness constraint to order data production in a Just-in-Time (JIT) fashion: the completion of the production of data with strictest data freshness constraint is delayed to the instant its consumers will be ready to use it. This allows for flexible task release offsets. We introduce a formal methodology to decompose Data Dependency Graphs into Dominant Paths by tracing the strictest data freshness constraints backward from the actuators. Based on this decomposition, we propose a Consensus Offset Search algorithm that synchronizes shared producers and private predecessors. This approach enforces end-to-end data freshness without the artificial latency of LET buffering. We formally prove that this offset-based alignment preserves the 100% schedula-bility capacity of Global EDF, ensuring data freshness while eliminating the computational overhead of redundant sampling. 

Index Terms —

I. I NTRODUCTION 

The paradigm shift towards high-level autonomous driv-ing demands software architectures capable of managing distributed critical applications while guaranteeing rigorous safety constraints. Modern automotive systems rely on dis-tributed multi-core Electronic Control Units (ECUs) managed by standards such as AUTOSAR to abstract functional logic from hardware topology [1]. The correctness of these sys-tems depends not only on the logical result of computation but also on the time at which these results are produced [2]. The foundational Time-Triggered Architecture (TTA) by Kopetz established that a global time base is a prerequisite for composability in distributed real-time systems, simplify-ing error detection and guaranteeing timeliness [3]. Today, these concepts underpin safety certification under ISO 26262, which relies on the Fault Tolerant Time Interval (FTTI)—the maximum time span between a fault and the system’s safe reaction [4]. Consequently, the timing behavior of the task chains that process sensor data becomes as critical as the logical correctness of the control algorithms themselves. To address temporal interference in these architectures, the Logical Execution Time (LET) paradigm has emerged as a dominant design pattern [5], [6]. By decoupling communi-cation from execution, LET ensures that task input/output timing is independent of platform speed. Recent advancements have extended this to distributed networks via System-Level LET (SL-LET) [7], and proposed algebraic approaches to collapse task chains into zero-jitter logical tasks [8]. How-ever, achieving this determinism often forces a trade-off. To guarantee that end-to-end latency remains within the FTTI while adhering to fixed LET intervals, designers typically over-dimension resources or accept stale data, effectively trading phase margins for scheduling predictability. For fast dynamic systems, such as a Lane Keeping Assist (LKA), using the freshest data is often more critical for maintaining stability than eliminating jitter; if lateral position data is old due to LET buffering, the steering controller calculates a reaction for a road curvature the vehicle has already passed, potentially leading to oscillation. To address this trade-off, we propose a fundamental inver-sion of the design model: rather than permitting the scheduler to execute tasks as soon as possible (ASAP), release times are constrained by the data freshness. We introduce a task offset assignment based on data freshness implied by task dependency. Unlike traditional real-time analysis where tight deadlines dictate high priority, we argue that tasks with large data freshness windows (high latency tolerance) should be as-signed earlier offsets. This ensures that high-latency operations are processed in advance, effectively anchoring the timeline. Conversely, tasks with strict data freshness constraints (short data freshness) are assigned later offsets, delaying their exe-cution until the precise moment their data is required. In this work, we formalize this logic to synchronize het-erogeneous sensor-to-actuator task chains. By analyzing the task dependency graph backwards from the actuation sink, we establish release offsets based on data freshness. This pre-fetching of slow data (e.g., Camera) ensures that highly dynamic, tighter data freshness, data (e.g., IMU) is sampled Just-In-Time (JIT). Once the offsets are applied, the runtime scheduler manages execution using standard Earliest Deadline First (EDF). This hybrid approach eliminates the ”stale data” problem caused by uncoordinated early execution without the artificial latency overhead of Logical Execution Time (LET) buffering. 

> arXiv:2603.09738v1 [cs.OS] 10 Mar 2026

A. Contributions 

The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: 1) Formal Path Decomposition: A methodology for decomposing Task Dependency DAGs into dominant data freshness paths, identifying the temporal relation-ship between high-latency sensor processing and high-frequency control tasks. 2) Offset Assignment based on Data Freshness: A start-time optimization algorithm that inverts standard ur-gency metrics, assigning earlier static offsets to tasks with larger data freshness to anchor the fusion window. 3) Shared Producer Consensus Search: A backtracking algorithm to resolve offset conflicts in shared producer tasks, ensuring data freshness across heterogeneous multi-rate consumer chains without breaking periodicity. 4) Schedulability Preservation Proof: A formal proof demonstrating that the introduction of data freshness-aware offsets preserves the 100% capacity of Global EDF, ensuring that data freshness is achieved without degrading the system’s processor utilization bounds. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows... II. R ELATED WORKS 

The scheduling of safety-critical automotive systems has traditionally been approached through the lens of task-centric deadlines. This section reviews the evolution from classical hard real-time scheduling to modern data-centric paradigms, highlighting the shift from task schedulability to end-to-end data freshness in Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs). 

A. Predictability in Task Chains 

The foundation of hard real-time systems lies in guaran-teeing that critical tasks meet their deadlines under worst-case conditions. Seminal work by Burns on Fixed Priority Schedul-ing (FPS) established rigorous Response Time Analysis (RTA) for single-core [9] and distributed CAN-based systems [10]. To address composability, Kopetz introduced the Time-Triggered Architecture (TTA) [3], advocating for a global time base to decouple communication from processing. However, modern autonomous systems have evolved into complex, multi-rate Cause-Effect Chains. Becker et al. [11] proposed a comprehensive end-to-end timing analysis for such chains, enabling analysis based on Worst Case-Execution Time (WCET) estimates even without detailed platform knowledge. While effective for verifying register-based communication, this model faces challenges in modern architectures where hidden latencies introduced by security algorithms, transient network loads, and complex AI data dependencies significantly impact system performance. Sun et al. [12] advanced RTA for DAG tasks with arbitrary release patterns. Li et al. [13] reviewed several techniques for end-to-end latency analysis, concluding that current solutions still underpins interplay and merging of multiple chains and that optimized prioritization and period assignment are still an open challenge. Recent research into Conditional DAGs has addressed the complexity of intra-task priority assignment to minimize re-sponse times on multiprocessors [14] and Response-Time Analysis for conditional branches in tasks [15]. While these methods optimize for execution urgency , they do not inherently account for data freshness .

B. Logical Execution Time (LET) and Task Chains 

To reconcile preemption flexibility with temporal determin-ism, the Logical Execution Time (LET) paradigm [5] fixes task input/output timing. This concept, standardized in AUTOSAR [1], has been the subject of intense optimization. Bini et al. [8] proposed an algebraic framework to collapse periodic LET chains into single zero-jitter logical tasks. While this eliminates jitter, it enforces rigid structural latencies. Addressing multi-core contention, Wang et al. [16] highlights that uncontrolled jitter is a major threat to data integrity, providing a linear-time complexity analysis on jitter at read and write events. Our solution uses a Consensus Search to fix static offsets, effectively damping the jitter propagation analyzed in their work. The data freshness constraint is used to build a schedule where the temporal slack is strategically placed at the start, making the system naturally robust to the propagation effects. 

C. Task Dependency and Data Freshness 

Palencia et al. [17] established that offsets can be used to mitigate the pessimism of Response Time Analysis (RTA) in transactions, their approach remains task-centric, focusing on processor interference. Our work extends the utility of offsets into the semantic domain, using them to align the data freshness windows of heterogeneous data streams. We demonstrate that by Construction, specifically through the offset assignment based on data freshness, we can ensure data freshness while maintaining the capacity preservation that Palencia’s analysis seeks to verify. Recent literature has increasingly focused on semantic met-rics of data freshness, distinguishing between simple prece-dence constraints and actual temporal properties like Data Age and Reaction Time . Gohari et al. [18] has provided a rigorous analysis for Worst-Case Data Age in multi-rate DAGs under timing uncertainty. However, their framework remains primarily analytical, quantifying the data freshness degradation inherent in existing schedules. G¨ unzel et al. [19] highlights the increasing complexity of automotive timing analysis, where heterogeneous com-munication mechanisms (e.g., LET, Implicit Communication) introduce varying levels of structural latency into cause-effect chains. Existing frameworks for DAGs primarily focus on bounding the Worst-Case Data Age (WCDA) under standard schedul-ing policies where tasks are released As Soon As Possible (ASAP). In these models, data age accumulates passively while fresh data waits in output buffers for consumer acti-vation. While these works provide rigorous analysis methods to bound the age of a given schedule, they generally assume the schedule is driven by standard execution priorities (e.g., EDF or Rate Monotonic). Our work differs by shifting the focus from analysis to construction . Rather than accepting the data freshness degradation inherent in ASAP scheduling, we employ a Start-Time Optimization strategy to actively inject delays, ensuring data freshness alignment by design. While frameworks like Zero-Jitter LET [8] achieve syn-chronization by buffering (delaying) the output , our method achieves synchronization by delaying the input (the sampling instant) of the faster tasks. This allows the system to handle high-latency dependencies (like vision systems) by starting them early, while the critical path (dominant dependency) is scheduled to execute only when the high-latency data is nearing availability, thereby ensuring data freshness at the moment of fusion. To illustrate the difference, consider a fusion task τf us that requires data from a high-latency Camera task ( τcam , C cam =10 ms ) and a low-latency IMU task ( τimu , C imu = 1 ms ).  

> •

Standard Approach (Analysis): Both tasks are released at t = 0 . τimu finishes at t = 1 , while τcam finishes at t = 10 . The fusion occurs at t = 10 . Consequently, the IMU data sits in the output buffer for ∆t = 9 ms ,resulting in a data age of 10 ms at the point of fusion.  

> •

Proposed Approach (Construction): We apply a Start Offset to the dominant task. τcam starts at t = 0 (due to its large data freshness window/latency). However, τimu 

is offset to start at t = 9 . Both tasks finish exactly at 

t = 10 . The IMU data age at fusion is minimal ( 1ms ), eliminating the 9ms of ”stale” waiting time. Our approach shifts from analyzing the age of execution flows to constructing flows that minimize waiting times by design. III. S YSTEM AND TASK MODEL 

We consider a real-time application modeled as a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) G = ( T , E), where nodes represent computational tasks and edges represent data dependencies. 

A. Task Model 

The task set T = {τ1, . . . , τ n} consists of n periodic tasks. Each task τi is characterized by the tuple: 

τi = ( Ci, T i, Φi, E i) (1) where:  

> •

Ci denotes the Estimated Execution Time 1. 

> •

Ei is the set of all Data Freshness Constraint imposed by consumers of τi, where Eji is the data freshness constraint imposed by the consumer τj to the producer 

τi. This parameter defines the maximum absolute time duration that data produced by τi remains useful for a consumer τj . Otherwise we say the data has expired. This concept is based on [21], and it can be derived from the      

> 1For schedulers assuming a total utilization <100% of the system capacity, the estimated execution time can be given by probabilistic approaches [20]. In scenarios where schedulers assumes utilization to be able to reach 100% of the system capacity, the estimated execution time is given by the Worst-Case Execution Time (WCET).

physical dynamics, such as the ability of the data to still represent the system environment, based on the control loop definitions.  

> •

Ti represents the Period of the task. The relative deadline is implicitly equal to the period (Di = Ti) unless constrained strictly by the data freshness constraint.  

> •

Φi is the Start Offset relative to the period arrival. Unlike standard scheduling where Φi is typically zero (ASAP), here Φi is a synthesis variable used to enforce data freshness alignment. 2

The set of edges E ⊆ T ×T defines the flow of information. Each directed edge eji = ( τj , τ i) ∈ E represents a dependency where τj produces data consumed by τi, associated with a specific data freshness constraint Eji .

Definition 1 (Worst-Case Communication Latency (WCCL) 

Lij ). Consistent with the AUTOSAR Layered Architecture [1] and Time-Triggered Architecture [3] principles, the latency 

Lij for a data dependency eij represents the interval between the data being written to the sender’s output port and it being available at the receiver’s input port. We define: 

Lij = ηij 

BW link 

| {z }

> Transmission

+ δstack + δslot 

| {z }

> Protocol & Access

(2) 

where:  

> •

ηij : The Protocol Data Unit (PDU) Size . This corre-sponds to the serialized payload of the AUTOSAR Signal Group associated with the Sender-Receiver interface, including framing headers.  

> •

BW link : The Physical Channel Baud Rate . This is the configured bit-rate of the underlying bus system (e.g., FlexRay, Ethernet, CAN-FD) to which the logical port is mapped via the Basic Software (BSW) configuration.  

> •

δstack : The COM Stack Overhead . Captures the worst-case execution time of the AUTOSAR COM and PDU Router (PduR) modules required to marshal/serialize the data from the application layer to the hardware buffer.  

> •

δslot : The TDMA Alignment Delay . In Time-Triggered architectures, this represents the worst-case waiting time for the next pre-assigned transmission slot (Cycle Time), effectively modeling the ”arbitration” as a deterministic scheduling constraint rather than stochastic contention. If such arbitration is not necessary, δslot = 0 .

To rigorously define data freshness, we establish the follow-ing temporal reference points for any k-th job of task τi:

Definition 2 (Release Time ri,k ). The instant the task is in-stantiated and becomes ready for scheduling. For sensor tasks, this corresponds to the physical sampling instant (snapshot of the environment). 

ri,k = ( k − 1) Ti + Φ i (3)     

> 2While Bini et al. [8] also use offsets, they apply them to delay the output
> (buffering) to force regularity. In contrast, we apply Φito delay the input
> (release) to minimize waiting time.

Definition 3 (Start Time si,k ). The instant the task actually begins execution on the processor. For a consumer task, this is the moment it reads its input buffers. 

si,k ≥ ri,k (4) 

Definition 4 (Finish Time fi,k ). The instant the task completes its execution and produces output data. 

fi,k = si,k + Ci (5) 

Remark 1. Given a dependency of τj to a task τi, from the definition of Ci and Lji , a data freshness constraint is only feasible if Eji ≥ Ci + Lji .B. Scheduling Constraints and Operational Assumptions 

To ensure the tractability of the proposed Start-Time Op-timization, we define the following baseline constraints and operational assumptions regarding the platform and data se-mantics. 

1) Baseline Constraints: These constraints define the rigid boundaries of the problem of scheduling while ensuring data freshness:  

> •

C1. Unconstrained Sensor Release: Source tasks (Sen-sors) are not bound by precedence constraints. They may be scheduled at any offset Φi within the period Ti to optimize the alignment with downstream consumers.  

> •

C2. Data Freshness Constraint: Let sj,m denote the 

Start Time of the m-th job of consumer task τj . Let 

ri,last denote the Release Time of the most recent job from predecessor τi that has completed and is available to τj before sj,m . The data freshness constraint requires: 

∀τi ∈ pred (τj ) : sj,m − ri,last ≤ Eji (6) If this condition is violated for any input stream (i.e., the data age exceeds the allowed data freshness Eji ), task τj

cannot execute safely.  

> •

C3. Sensing-Time Anchoring: The age of a sample is strictly relative to its production instant (sensing or creation time ri,k ), not its transmission start or reception time. Network delays ( Lij ) consume the data freshness budget Eji rather than extending it. 

2) System Assumptions: We adopt the following assump-tions to abstract the hardware/software interface:  

> •

A1. Localized Data Freshness (Non-Transitive Data Age): We assume the data freshness attribute is reset at each processing stage. The age of a derived sample produced by τj is relative to τj ’s execution time, not the original sensor’s timestamp. Rationale: While the input 

constraint (C2) ensures the chain’s temporal integrity up to that point, the output data freshness represents the useful life of the computation result itself (e.g., an object list is fresh for 50 ms after computation, provided the input image was fresh when computed).  

> •

A2. Atomic Execution-Communication: We model the Sense/Transform and Communicate phases as atomic non-preemptible units. A task τi completes its computa-tion Ci and immediately flushes data to the network. This simplifies the interference model by treating the WCET and Communication Latency as a contiguous block in the worst-case analysis.  

> •

A3. Deterministic Network Latency: We assume a directly connected network topology where the transmis-sion time for a message from node N ode i to N ode j is constant and deterministic, given by Lij . This assumption holds for time-sensitive networks (TSN) or switched Ethernet with static forwarding tables.  

> •

A4. Actuation-Driven Phasing: The system timeline is anchored to the actuation requirements. We assume the first actuation dictates the periodicity start ( t = 0 ). Impli-cation: The initial period is treated as a safe ”booting phase” where the system is permitted to pre-load the pipeline. This allows high-latency data (where Eji > T i)to be sampled in the negative timeline (pre-boot) or during the first cycle, ensuring that steady-state data freshness constraints are met from the very first effective actuation. 

C. Data Freshness Constraint 

We adopt the following definition of data age for multi-rate chains. For a producer job τi,k released at ri,k and a consumer job τj,m that begins execution at sj,m , the instantaneous age 

∆age of the data at the moment of consumption is defined as the time elapsed since the producer’s release: 

∆age (i, j ) = sj,m − ri,k (7) The system is considered schedulable only if, for all active dependencies (τi, τ j ) ∈ E , the age at consumption does not exceed the producer’s freshness threshold: 

max 

> ∀k,m

(sj,m − ri,k ) ≤ Eji (8) The objective of the proposed Start-Time Optimization is to compute the vector Φ = {Φ1, . . . , Φn} such that tasks with tight Eji are delayed (increasing Φi) to execute Just-In-Time (JIT) for their consumers, thereby minimizing the holding time component of ∆age .IV. A DAPTING START OFFSET TO OPTIMIZE DATA 

FRESHNESS IN TASK CHAINS 

Traditional real-time scheduling focuses on task urgency, where the most constrained tasks (shortest deadlines) are prioritized to execute as early as possible (ASAP). However, in sensor-fusion chains, ASAP execution is often the primary driver of data staleness. When a high-frequency sensor with strict data freshness completes early, it must wait for high-latency support tasks (e.g., vision processing) to complete before fusion can occur. During this synchronization gap, the fresh data ages, often exceeding its data freshness bound before it is ever consumed. To address this, we propose a shift toward Just-In-Time (JIT) scheduling. By calculating static release offsets ( Φ) based on signal expiry rather than task urgency, we can anchor the execution of the entire chain to the slowest bottleneck and delay the sampling of fast sensors. This ensures that all inputs arrive at the fusion node at the peak of their data freshness. 

A. Motivating Example: The AEB Sensor Fusion Chain 

To illustrate the impact of this schedule alignment, we analyze a simplified Automated Emergency Braking (AEB) system under both single-core and multi-core scenarios. 

System Parameters  

> •

Global Period ( Tctrl ): 20 ms  

> •

Consumer Task ( τctrl ): Brake Controller ( Cctrl = 1 ms ).  

> •

Input 1 - IMU ( τimu ): Strict Constraint ( Cimu = 2 ms ,

Ectrl imu = 5 ms ).  

> •

Input 2 - Vision ( τvis ): Loose Constraint ( Cvis = 10 ms ,

Ectrl vis = 20 ms ). 

Scenario 1: Single-Core Serialization 

In a single-core system, a naive Rate-Monotonic or ”Tightest Data Freshness First” approach ( Order : τimu → τvis →

τctrl ) results in τimu finishing at t = 2 ms . The data then waits 10 ms for τvis to finish. At the moment of consumption (t = 12 ms ), the IMU data age is: 

Age imu = fctrl − fimu = 13 ms − 2ms = 11 ms > E ctrl imu 

=⇒ FAILURE 

By inverting this to a JIT-based scheduling ( Order : τvis →

τimu → τctrl ), the loose task fills the initial gap. τimu finishes at t = 12 ms and is consumed at t = 13 ms .

Age imu = 13 ms − 12 ms = 1 ms ≤ Ectrl imu =⇒ SUCCESS Scenario 2: Multi-Core Global Scheduling 

On a multi-core platform, an ASAP approach releases both sensors at t = 0 . τimu finishes on Core 1 at t = 2 ms , while 

τvis finishes on Core 2 at t = 10 ms . Synchronization for τctrl 

occurs at t = 11 ms :

Age imu = 11 ms − 2ms = 9 ms > E ctrl imu =⇒ FAILURE 

Our proposed Offset-based approach anchors the chain to the vision bottleneck ( t = 11 ms ) and calculates a release offset for the IMU: Φimu = 11 ms −5ms = 6 ms . By delaying the IMU sampling until t = 6 ms , it completes at t = 8 ms :

Age imu = 11 ms −6ms = 5 ms ≤ Ectrl imu =⇒ SUCCESS 

The remainder of this section formalizes the methodology required to implement this data freshness-aware scheduling across complex Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs):  

> •

Dependency in Task-chains: Formalizing the relation-ship between producers and consumers.  

> •

Demand-Driven Period Derivation: Determining the optimal T for producers based on consumer frequency.  

> •

Dominant Path Decomposition: Identifying the bottle-neck paths that dictate the anchor points of the schedule.  

> •

Task Prioritization (Linear and Non-Dominant): Pro-posal for assigning offsets in both simple chains and complex branching structures.  

> •

Shared Producer (Multi-Rate JIT): Resolving offset conflicts when a single producer serves multiple con-sumers with varying rates and data freshness windows. 

B. Dependency in Task-chains 

Based on the system model introduced in Section III, considering a real-time application modeled as a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) G = ( T , E), where nodes represent computational tasks and edges represent data dependencies, for any task τ ∈ T , we define:  

> •

Successor Set ( succ (τ )): The set of consumers. 

succ (τ ) = {τk ∈ T | (τ, τ k) ∈ E} (9)  

> •

Predecessor Set ( pred (τ )): The set of producers. 

pred (τ ) = {τj ∈ T | (τj , τ ) ∈ E} (10) 

C. Demand-Driven Period Derivation 

In contrast to traditional sensing-driven models, we employ a Demand-Driven approach. The temporal attributes of aproducer task τi are not arbitrary; they are derived constraints dictated by the requirements of its consumer set succ (τi). We define the derivation rules for the producer’s period Ti and required data freshness Eji as follows: 

1. Linear Dependency (1:1 Case): Consider a simple chain where task τi produces data solely for a single consumer τj .The producer must adapt its rate to match the consumption rhythm of the consumer.  

> •

Derived Period: To guarantee fresh data availability for every execution of the consumer without wasteful over-sampling, the producer inherits the consumer’s demands, either producing a new sample at the consumer rate (i.e., 

Tj ≥ Eji ) or according to the data freshness constraint (i.e., when Tj < E ji ). 

Ti = max( Tj , E ji ) (11) 

2. Shared Producer / Divergent Flow (1:N Case): Con-sider a Producer τi that publishes data to a set of multiple consumers succ (τi) = {τ1, . . . , τ k}. The producer must adapt its period to properly attend all of its consumers simultane-ously.  

> •

Derived Period (Harmonicity): To maintain synchro-nization with multiple consumers, the producer must operate at a rate that is harmonically compatible with the entire consumer set: 

Ti = GCD ({max( Tc, E ci ) | ∀ τc ∈ succ (τi)}) (12) 

Remark 2. This backward propagation of constraints ensures that the Actuator (the end of a data path) drives the timing definition. The Actuator’s period Thead is determined by the physical plant dynamics, and this rhythm propagates upstream to the sensors. D. Dominant Path Decomposition 

We define the dominance relationships based on the data freshness constraints ( V ) for input selection, and Period (T )for output selection. 

Definition 5 (Critical Predecessor ( previous (τ ))) . Identifies the dominant source of data for task τ . The dominant prede-cessor is the task τj whose data has the strictest data freshness constraint (smallest data freshness window) imposed by τ .This defines the critical data freshness path. 

previous (τ ) = 



arg min   

> τj∈pred (τ)

{Ejτ } if pred (τ )̸ = ∅∅ if pred (τ ) = ∅

(13) We define the Dominant Task Chain as a path through the Task Dependency Tree rooted at a specific Actuator Task τhead 

where every node τk in the path is the critical predecessor of the node τk−1 (i.e., τk = previous (τk−1)). 

E. Task Prioritization - Case 1: Linear Task Chain 

For a linear task chain P executing on a single processor, the explicit modeling of data dependencies can be simplified. We reduce the precedence-constrained scheduling problem to a standard Earliest Deadline First (EDF) problem by deriving 

Effective Deadlines (Def f ) for each task. In a linear chain, a predecessor τi must finish early enough to allow all subsequent tasks {τi+1 , . . . , τ N } to execute and communicate before the global chain deadline. Therefore, the absolute deadline of a task is not its period T , but a stricter constraint derived from the demand of its successors. Let the task chain consist of N tasks, where τN is the chain head (Actuator) and τ1 is the source (Sensor). 

1. Base Case (Chain Head): The actuator must complete by the end of the period. 

Def f N = T (14) 

2. Recursive Step (Upstream Propagation): For any task 

τi (i < N ), the deadline is the effective deadline of its successor τi+1 minus the execution time of the successor and the communication latency between them. 

Def f i = Def f i+1 − Ci+1 − Li,i +1 (15) 

3. General Closed Form: Substituting recursively, the effective deadline for any task τi is the global period reduced by the cumulative worst-case execution and transmission time of the downstream path: 

Def f i = T −

> N

X

> j=i+1

(Cj + Lj−1,j ) (16) By assigning these derived deadlines, we guarantee that: 

Def f  

> 1

< D ef f  

> 2

< · · · < D ef f N (17) When scheduled under EDF:  

> •

At the start of the period ( t = 0 ), all tasks are released.  

> •

The scheduler selects the task with the smallest deadline, which is always the source τ1. 

> •

Once τ1 completes, τ2 becomes the runnable task with the earliest deadline.  

> •

This naturally enforces the topological order τ1 → τN

purely through deadline priorities, satisfying the depen-dency constraints without explicit synchronization prim-itives. 

Remark 3 (Data Freshness Check) . If the data freshness constraint Ei+1 i is tighter than the structural slack, the deadline must be further clamped. The generalized effective deadline is: 

Def f i = min 



Def f i+1 − Ci+1 − Li,i +1 , ri + Ei+1 i



(18) 

However, in valid linear designs, the structural deadline derived above usually satisfies the data freshness requirements of well-formed control loops. 1) Schedulability in Global EDF: Standard Global EDF proofs rely on the property that the scheduler is work-conserving (a core is never idle if a task is ready). A suspended task is ”open” but not ”ready,” creating an anomaly where the processor idles despite pending workload. Consequence: It is proven that self-suspensions induce a ”jitter” effect that is harder to schedule than pure computation. The standard G-EDF schedulability test fails because: Demand (t) + SuspensionGap (t) > Supply (t) (19) The parameter t ∈ R+ denotes a continuous time interval. For any task τi, the demand Demand (τi, t ) is the sum of the execution times of all jobs of τi whose arrival times and absolute deadlines lie within [0 , t ], while Supply (t) = m · t.The total system demand over interval t is then: 

X

> τi∈T

 t − Φi

Ti



+ 1 



· Ci + SuspensionGap (t) (20) Where the SuspensionGap is the sum of all idle intervals on m cores where no critical task can be scheduled due to data freshness-imposed offsets. To restore the validity of the EDF proof, we must move from ”Independent Task Analysis” to Transaction-Based Analysis 

using the offsets Φk defined previously. Note that this is only a logical artifact to evaluate schedulability of the system considering worst-case analysis, and the real system will not suffer from these offsets and will idle the CPU instead. By enforcing the release offset Φcons = Cprod +Lcons,prod ,we ensure that: 1) Independence Restoration: When τcons is finally re-leased at t = Φ cons , the data is already available. τcons 

never waits. C′ 

> cons

= Ccons .2) Validity of EDF: The demand of τcons is shifted in time. It contributes to the system load only over the interval 

[Φ cons , D cons ].The schedulability check must be updated to an Offset-Aware Test :

∀t > 0, X

> τi∈T

max 



0,

 t − Φi

T



+ 1 



· Ci ≤ m · t (21) where m is the number of processors. The test must hold for all 

t > 0 to ensure the system is schedulable under all conditions. In practice, t is checked at task arrivals and deadlines up to the Least Common Multiple (LCM) of all task periods. The term 

⌊ t−Φi 

> T

⌋ + 1 counts how many instances (jobs) of task τi have been released within the window t, accounting for the delay introduced by the offset Φi. This formula correctly accounts for the fact that downstream tasks cannot demand CPU time at the beginning of the period. 

F. Task Prioritization - Case 2: Handling Non-Dominant Branches 

When a consumer task τcons requires synchronized data from multiple predecessor branches (e.g., sensor fusion), the schedule must ensure that all input data remains valid at the specific instant of consumption fcons,k (a new sample of cons 

is produced). This problem is universally solved by identifying the sys-tem’s temporal Anchor and aligning all other branches relative to it. This approach applies equally to single-core (ordering) and multi-core (offset) scenarios. The instant of consumption fcons,k is determined by the ”Bottleneck Branch”—the predecessor path with the longest physical latency (execution + transmission). The consumer cannot start until this slowest path completes, therefore, we can adjust the start of other branches based on this anchor time. Let P be the set of all predecessor tasks feeding τcons . The anchor time relative to the period start is: 

fcons,k = max  

> τi∈P

(Φ i + Ci + Li,cons ) + Ccons (22) where Φi is the release offset of predecessor τi.Once the anchor fcons,k is established, we calculate the required timing for every other predecessor τj to ensure its data does not expire before fcons,k , given as the Latest Safe Start Time ( LST j ):

LST j = fcons,k − Econs j (23) The scheduler’s goal is to align the actual start time sj as close to LST j as possible ( sj ≈ LST j ). The gap between the earliest possible start ( 0) and the required start ( LST )represents the Temporal Slack .How we utilize this slack depends on the hardware resource constraints, but the mathematical target ( LST ) remains con-stant. 

1) Case 2.1: Global Scheduling (Multi-Core):  

> •

Mechanism: Explicit Offset Injection.  

> •

Since cores are available in parallel, we simply delay the release of the fast/strict task τj until the last safe moment to minimize data age and buffer residence. 

Φj = LST j (24)  

> •

Result: The task sleeps during the slack time, saving system bandwidth or allowing lower-priority background tasks to run. The effective deadline of these task is then set to Def f j = fcons,k , the anchor. 

2) Case 2.2: Serial Scheduling (Single-Core):  

> •

Mechanism: Effective Deadline Ordering.  

> •

To ensure the most fragile data (tight data freshness) is generated last (immediately before consumption) we treat the data freshness constraints as a Virtual Dependency Chain . 

> •

We conceptually place the ”Strict” task τstrict as the immediate predecessor of the Consumer, and the ”Loose” task τloose as a predecessor of the Strict task ( τloose →

. . . → τstrict → τcons ).  

> •

Deadline Derivation: Using our recursive effective dead-line definition ( Di = Dnext − Cnext ), the task with the tighter data freshness (closer to consumption) inherits a 

larger effective deadline than the loose task.  

> •

Result: Since Def f loose < Def f strict , an EDF scheduler naturally selects the Loose task first. It executes earlier in the frame, allowing the Strict task to execute later (closer to the deadline), thereby minimizing the age of the strict data at the moment of consumption. 

Remark 4. In both cases, the Offset-Aware Schedulability Test validates the system.  

> •

For Multi-Core, Φj reduces the interference window, and when combined with the effective deadline set to the start of the next task, allows for ordering even in G-EDF.  

> •

For Single-Core, the ordering ensures that no task ef-fectively ”blocks” another beyond the allowable data freshness window. G. Shared Producer: Multi-Rate JIT Scheduling 

We consider a system where a shared producer τS feeds two or more consumer chains.  

> •

Path A (Strict): Requires τS to push data very late in the frame (high freshness).  

> •

Path B (Standard): One or more ”normal” chain that typically executes early. If we set the offset of the shared task ΦS to satisfy Path A, 

τS finishes at time tlate . However, Path B (Consumer τB ) is scheduled by default at t = 0 .Issue: ΦB (0) < ΦS + CS (tlate ) (25) 

τB attempts to execute before τS has produced the current data. It would read the previous job’s data, which is likely expired ( Age ≈ T + tlate ). The problem can be interpreted as: ”find a Static Global Offset ( Φshared ) that satisfies heterogeneous consumer con-straints” . By definition, Tshared = GCD (T1, T 2, ... ). Because the shared task runs at a higher frequency, instance j might satisfy Path A, while instance j + 1 satisfies Path B within the same hyperperiod. Going for a ”Per-Job Offset” consists of applying a per-job offset if a match isn’t possible. To keep the proposal EDF proof valid, we must frame this not as ”variable offsets” but as a Multi-Task Decomposition over the hyperperiod. If Φ changes for every job, we are essentially braking periodicity. Instead, we must define a pattern that repeats every hyperperiod, by essentially creating a task set with H/T sub-tasks, which is formally schedulable under EDF. To avoid the ”Domino Effect” of shifting offsets while main-taining EDF periodicity, we propose a recursive tightening algorithm. Let Succ (τS ) be the set of consumer tasks for a shared producer τS . When a producer τS is shared by multiple consumers Succ (τS ), we must find a single static offset ΦS

that satisfies the data freshness of all paths. To maintain EDF periodicity, we avoid job-specific offsets by applying Static Offset Propagation .For each consumer Ci ∈ Succ (τS ), let fcons,i be the required start time of Ci. The valid finish time for τS relative to Ci is the interval: 

fS ∈ [fcons,i − EiS , f cons,i − LiS − Ci] (26) Accounting for the execution time CS and Lij (i.e., the worst-case scenario ¡ EiS ), the valid release offset ΦS relative to the frame of Ci must satisfy: 

ΦS ∈ [fcons,i − EiS , f cons,i − CS − LiS − Ci] (27) Algorithm 1 iterates through consumers, using Back-Propagation to adjust ΦS when conflicts arise. 

Algorithm 1 Shared Producer Consensus Search 

Require: τS , Succ (τS ) = {C1, . . . , C n}

Ensure: Static Offset ΦS or Failure  

> 1:

ord ← sort Succ (τS ) by ascending Ti 

> 2:

ΦS ← tanchor, 0 − EiS ▷ Initialize with highest frequency path  

> 3:

Success ← False  

> 4:

while not Success do  

> 5:

Conf lictF ound ← False  

> 6:

for Ci ∈ ord do  

> 7:

LB i ← fcons,i − EiS ▷ Latest release to be fresh  

> 8:

U B i ← fcons,i − CS − LiS − Ci ▷ Latest release to be ready  

> 9:

I ← { j · TS + Φ S ∀j ∈ [0 , Ti 

> TS

− 1] } ▷ Always consider all jobs of τS . 

> 10:

if ∄ inst ∈ I : inst ∈ [LB i, U B i] then  

> 11:

ΦS ← AdjustOffset (Φ S , LB i, U B i) 

> 12:

Conf lictF ound ← True  

> 13:

break ▷ Rollback to re-verify previous consumers  

> 14:

if not Conf lictF ound then  

> 15:

Success ← True  

> 16:

if ΦS > T S then  

> 17:

return Failure: Invoke Hyperperiod Decomposi-tion  

> 18:

return ΦS

1) Rollback and Adjustment Strategy: If an instance of τS

fails the data freshness check for Ci, the offset ΦS must be adjusted. If fS < f cons,i −EiS , we must increase ΦS to ”push” the production closer to consumption, i.e., ΦS = Φ S +1 | Φs ∈I. Since I considers all jobs of τS that could be of use to τcons 

([0 , Ti 

> TS

]), there is no offset that would satisfy all consumers (rollback verification). We would need to apply hyperperiod decomposition to enforce different offsets to different jobs of 

τS .

2) Consistency Preservation (Non-Breakage Analysis): Let 

τS be a shared producer that feeds data to a consumer τcons .When ΦS is adjusted to satisfy Ccons , it creates a ”Domino Effect.” We preserve the data freshness of private predecessors through Phase-Shift Invariance .If ΦS forces τcons to start at fcons,k +∆ , then τS has become the anchor of τcons . By definition, with τS being the anchor, the offset of all other producers of τcons would be shifted by 

∆ to account for the new anchor. This remains valid once 

ΦS ∈ I. Otherwise, if ΦS is not the anchor, as ΦS ∈ I , there is no need to change the offset of other producers and τS

would not loose data freshness by the definition of I.The relative age Age = ( fcons,i + ∆) − (Φ P + ∆ + CP )

remains constant. Thus, satisfying the shared producer con-straints never invalidates the internal synchronization of the individual paths, provided the system utilization U ≤ m.

3) Hyperperiod Decomposition: In cases where no single 

ΦS satisfies the intersection of all consumer’s data freshness windows ( T

> i

[LB i, U B i]), the task τS is decomposed into 

N = H/T S distinct periodic tasks. Each task τS,j is assigned a unique fixed offset ΦS,j tailored to the specific consumer active in that hyperperiod slot. This preserves the periodicity required for the EDF Schedulability Test while satisfying heterogeneous data freshness requirements. V. P ROOF OF SCHEDULABILITY CAPACITY PRESERVATION 

This section presents the proof that our offset based solution preserves EDF Schedulability Capacity, which is done through demand bound function and properly handling the work-conserving property when tackling self-suspension of tasks. 

A. Theorem: Asynchronous Dominance 

Theorem 1. Let T = {τ1, . . . , τ n} be a set of periodic tasks with implicit deadlines Di = Ti. The introduction of static offsets Φi ≥ 0 to satisfy data freshness constraints does not reduce the maximum schedulable utilization bound of the system under Global EDF. B. Proof by Demand Bound Function (DBF) 

The Demand Bound Function DBF (τi, t ) defines the maxi-mum execution requirement of task τi in any interval of length 

t. For a synchronous task ( Φi = 0 ): 

DBF sync (τi, t ) = max 



0,

 t − Di

Ti



+ 1 



· Ci (28) When an offset Φi is introduced, the first job is delayed, shifting the demand curve to the right: 

DBF async (τi, t ) = max 



0,

 t − (Φ i + Di)

Ti



+ 1 



· Ci

(29) Step 1: Interval Dominance. For any t > 0, since Φi ≥ 0,it follows that:  t − (Φ i + Di)

Ti



≤

 t − Di

Ti



(30) Consequently, DBF async (t) ≤ DBF sync (t) for all intervals. The total demand on the m processors is strictly less than or equal to the synchronous case, which is the worst-case scenario for EDF schedulability. 

Step 2: Utilization Invariance. The long-term capacity requirement is governed by utilization U = lim t→∞ DBF (t) 

> t

.Since: 

lim 

> t→∞

(⌊ t−Φi−Di 

> Ti

⌋ + 1) Ci

t = Ci

Ti

(31) The total system utilization U = P Ci 

> Ti

remains unchanged. 

C. Handling the ”Self-Suspension” Artifact 

One may argue that the offset Φi acts as a self-suspension, which is known to degrade EDF bounds. However, in our 

Static Offset Propagation , Φi is not a dynamic suspension but a release delay . 

> •

Work-Conserving Property: Under G-EDF, the sched-uler remains work-conserving. If core mj is idle during 

[0 , Φi], it is available to any other ready task.  

> •

Idle Time vs. Capacity: The ”Suspension Gap” only impacts capacity if Di is shortened. Because we preserve the relative deadline D′ 

> i

= Ti (by shifting both release and deadline), the task density δi = Ci/D i is invariant. 

D. Proof Conclusion 

Since DBF async (t) ≤ DBF sync (t) and P Ci 

> Di

remains constant, any task set that is schedulable at U ≤ m without offsets remains schedulable with our data freshness-aware offsets. The capacity 1.0 × m is preserved. VI. C ONCLUSION 

The evolution of real-time systems has shifted from ensuring task completion within strict deadlines to guaranteeing the data freshness of data across complex, multi-rate chains. This paper addressed the inherent ”freshness-for-determinism” trade-off found in current automotive standards. While the Logical Execution Time (LET) paradigm provides structural determinism, it does so by injecting artificial latencies through output buffering. Conversely, standard As-Soon-As-Possible (ASAP) scheduling, while computationally efficient, suffers from data aging in multi-rate sensor fusion where fast data waits for high-latency dependencies. We have proposed Scheduling based on Data Freshness , an inversion of the traditional priority logic of real-time systems. By employing offset assignment based on data freshness, our constructive methodology assigns earlier static offsets to high-latency tasks, effectively ”anchoring” the timeline to accommodate slow sensor processing (e.g., vision systems). By delaying the sampling instants (offsets) of data freshness-critical tasks rather than buffering their outputs, we achieve 

Just-In-Time (JIT) execution, which aligns data production with consumption and minimizes data age at the point of fu-sion. To resolve temporal conflicts in shared task structures, we introduced a Consensus Search backtracking algorithm that ensures global data freshness across heterogeneous consumer paths without requiring job-specific scheduling. Furthermore, we formally proved that this offset-based alignment preserves the 100% capacity of Global EDF , demonstrating that data freshness can be guaranteed without sacrificing CPU utilization bounds. Our work differentiates itself from the current state-of-the-art by moving from analysis to construction . While recent literature [14], [15], [18], [19] provides rigorous methods to bound the Worst-Case Data Age (WCDA) and Worst-Case Response Time (WCRT) of existing schedules, our framework actively injects offsets to eliminate the waiting time inherent in ASAP execution. Furthermore, unlike LET frameworks [8], [16] that achieve predictability by delaying the availability of already-computed data, our method delays the sampling instant. This preserves the phase margin of high-frequency control loops by ensuring that the fusion task consumes the freshest possible data snapshot at the precise moment its slowest dependency becomes available. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

This work was partially funded by Fundac ¸ ˜ ao de Apoio da UFMG (Fundep), through Linha VI – Conectividade Veicu-lar, a prioritary program from Mover (Mobilidade Verde e Inovac ¸ ˜ ao), project AutoDL (29271.03.01/2023.04-00). REFERENCES [1] AUTOSAR, “Requirements on timing extensions,” AUTOSAR Develop-ment Partnership, Tech. Rep. AUTOSAR CP R22-11, 2022, document ID: 411. [2] G. C. Buttazzo, Hard Real-Time Computing Systems: Predictable Scheduling Algorithms and Applications , 3rd ed. Springer, 2011. [3] H. Kopetz and G. Bauer, “The time-triggered architecture,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 91, no. 1, pp. 112–126, Jan. 2003. [4] ISO 26262: Road Vehicles – Functional Safety , International Organiza-tion for Standardization Std., 2018. [5] T. A. Henzinger, B. Horowitz, and C. M. Kirsch, “Giotto: A time-triggered language for embedded programming,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 91, no. 1, pp. 84–99, 2003. [6] C. M. Kirsch and A. Sokolova, “The logical execution time paradigm,” in Advances in Real-Time Systems . Springer, 2012, pp. 103–120. [7] K.-B. Gemlau, H. von Hasseln, and R. Ernst, “Industry-track: System-level logical execution time for automotive software development,” in Proceedings of the 2022 International Conference on Embedded Software (EMSOFT) . IEEE, 2022, pp. 26–35. [8] E. Bini, P. Pazzaglia, and M. Maggio, “Zero-jitter chains of periodic let tasks via algebraic rings,” IEEE Transactions on Computers , vol. 72, no. 11, pp. 3057–3071, 2023. [9] A. Burns, “Scheduling hard real-time systems: A review,” Software Engineering Journal , vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 116–128, 1991. [10] K. Tindell and J. Clark, “Holistic schedulability analysis for dis-tributed hard real-time systems,” Microprocessing and Microprogram-ming , vol. 40, no. 2-3, pp. 117–134, 1994. [11] M. Becker, D. Dasari, S. Mubeen, M. Behnam, and T. Nolte, “End-to-end timing analysis of cause-effect chains in automotive embedded systems,” Journal of Systems Architecture , vol. 80, pp. 104–113, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/S1383762117300681 [12] J. Sun, N. Guan, and W. Yi, “Response time analysis for dag tasks with arbitrary intra-task priority assignment,” IEEE Transactions on Computers , vol. 72, no. 5, pp. 1234–1248, 2023. [13] D. Li, H. Wan, J. Li, and K. Chen, “Efficient end-to-end latency analysis for automotive cause-effect chains,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 112–125, 2024, early Access 2023. [14] Q. He, J. Sun, N. Guan, M. Lv, and Z. Sun, “Real-time scheduling of conditional dag tasks with intra-task priority assignment,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 3196–3209, 2023. [15] A. Melani, M. Bertogna, V. Bonifaci, A. Marchetti-Spaccamela, and G. C. Buttazzo, “Response-time analysis of conditional dag tasks in multiprocessor systems,” in 2015 27th Euromicro Conference on Real-Time Systems , 2015, pp. 211–221. [16] S. Wang, E. Bini, Q. Deng, and M. Maggio, “Jitter propagation in task chains,” in 2025 IEEE Real-Time Systems Symposium (RTSS) , 2025, pp. 96–108. [17] J. Palencia and M. Gonzalez Harbour, “Schedulability analysis for tasks with static and dynamic offsets,” Proceedings of the 19th IEEE Real-Time Systems Symposium , pp. 26–37, 1998. [18] P. Gohari, M. Nasri, and J. Voeten, “Data-age analysis for multi-rate task chains under timing uncertainty,” in Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Real-Time Networks and Systems , ser. RTNS ’22. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2022, p. 24–35. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3534879.3534893 [19] M. Guenzel, N. Ueter, K.-H. Chen, and J.-J. Chen, “Timing analysis of cause-effect chains with heterogeneous communication mechanisms,” in Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Real-Time Networks and Systems , ser. RTNS ’23. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2023, p. 224–234. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3575757.3593640 [20] G. Bernat, A. Colin, and S. Petters, “Wcet analysis of probabilistic hard real-time systems,” in 23rd IEEE Real-Time Systems Symposium, 2002. RTSS 2002. , 2002, pp. 279–288. [21] A. A. Fr¨ ohlich, “SmartData: an IoT-ready API for sensor networks,” 

International Journal of Sensor Networks , vol. 28, no. 3, p. 202, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1504/ijsnet.2018.096264