Title: On the Codesign of Scientific Experiments and Industrial Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.26613v1

Published Time: Mon, 30 Mar 2026 01:25:37 GMT

Number of Pages: 91

Markdown Content:
# On the Co-Design of Scientific Experiments and Industrial Systems 

Tommaso Dorigo a,b,c,d , Pietro Vischia e,af , Shahzaib Abbas a,u , Tosin Adewumi b, Lama Alkhaled b, Lorenzo Arsini am,an ,Muhammad Awais a,c,d,f , Maxim Borisyak l, András Bóta b, Florian Bury a,ao , Sascha Caron ac , James Carzon h, Long Chen a,i ,Prakash C. Chhipa b, Paul Christakopoulos b, Jacopo De Piccoli c,f , Andrea De Vita f, Zlatan Dimitrov z, Michele Doro f,c ,Luigi Favaro m, Francesco Ferranti a,b , Santiago Folgueras e, Rihab Gargouri b, Nicolas R. Gauger b,i , Andrea Giammanco m,Christian Glaser a,aa,ar,as , Tobias Golling al , João A. Gonçalves au,av , Hui Han b, Hamza Hanif a,q , Lukas Heinrich at , Yan Chai Hum ad ,Florent Imbert b, Andreas Ipp t, Michael Kagan ab , Noor Kainat Syeda q, Rukshak Kapoor ai , Aparup Khatua b, Eduard J. Kerkhoven x,Jan Kieseler a,k , Tobias Kortus a,i , Ashish Kumar Singh b, Marius S. Köppel ap , Daniel Lanchares e, Je ff rey Lazar m, Ann Lee b,h ,Enrico Lupi f, Pelayo Leguina e, Christos Leonidopoulos ao , Giuseppe Levi n,q , Boying Li b, Chang Liu b, Marcus Liwicki a,Karl Lowenmark a, Carlo Mancini-Terracciano am,an , Dominik Maršík b, Leonidas Matsakas b, Hamam Mokayed b,Federico Nardi a,f,g , Amirhossein Nayebiastaneh b, Xuan T. Nguyen c,i , Aitor Orio aj , Jingjing Pan a,k , Jigar Patel c,Carmelo Pellegrino o, María Pereira Martínez a,v , Karolos Potamianos ax , Shah Rukh Qasim w, Martin Ravn ar ,Luis Recabarren Vergara aw,f,c , Humberto Reyes-González s, Hipolito A. Riveros Guevara ae , Ippocratis D. Saltas r, Rajkumar Saini b,Fredrik Sandin a, Alexander Schilling a,i , Kylian Schmidt k, Nicola Serra w, Saqib Shahzad y, Foteini Simistira Liwicki b,Giles C. Strong a, Kristian Tchiorniy at , Mia Tosi f, Andrey Ustyuzhanin l, Xabier Cid Vidal a,v , Kinga A. Wozniak al , Mengqing Wu ac ,Zahraa Zaher m

> a

MODE Collaboration, 

> b

Luleå University of Technology, Luleå, Sweden 

> c

Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare - Sezione di Padova, via Marzolo 8‘, Padova, 35131, Italy 

> d

Universal Scientific Education and Research Network (USERN), Italy 

> e

Departamento de Física and ICTEA, Universidad de Oviedo, , Oviedo, 33007, Spain 

> f

Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia G.Galilei, University of Padova, via Marzolo 8, Padova, 35131, Italy 

> g

University Clermont Auvergne, France 

> h

Carnegie Mellon University, USA 

> i

RPTU University Kaiserslautern-Landau, Germany 

> j

Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos, Brazil 

> k

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Germany 

> l

Constructor University Bremen, Germany 

> m

UCLouvain, Centre for Cosmology, Particle Physics and Phenomenology, CP3, Chemin du Cyclotron 2, Louvain-la-Neuve, 1348, Belgium 

> n

Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare - Sezione di Bologna, viale Berti Pichat 6, Bologna, 40127, Italy 

> o

Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare - CNAF, viale Berti Pichat 6, Bologna, 40127, Italy 

> p

Dipartimento di Fisica - Università di Bologna, viale Berti Pichat 6, Bologna, 40127, Italy 

> q

Simon Fraser University, , Burnaby, , Canada 

> r

Institute of Physics, Czech Academy of Sciences, Na Slovance 2, 182 21 Prague, Czechia, Burnaby, , Czechia 

> s

Institute for Theoretical Particle Physics and Cosmology, RWTH Aachen University, , Aachen, , Germany 

> t

Institute for Theoretical Physics, TU Wien, Wiedner Hauptstraße 8-10, Vienna, 1040, Austria 

> u

University of Karachi, , Karachi, , Pakistan 

> v

Instituto Galego de Física de Altas Enerxías (IGFAE), Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, , Santiago de Compostela, , Spain 

> w

University of Zurich, , Zurich, , Switzerland 

> x

Chalmers University of Technology, , Göteborg, , Sweden 

> y

Florida Space Institute, University of Central Florida, Orlando, 32826, USA 

> z

GATE Institute, Sofia, 1164, Bulgaria 

> aa

TU Dortmund University, Dortmund, 44227, Germany 

> ab

SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA, 94025, USA 

> ac

Institute for Mathematics, Astrophysics and Particle Physics, Radboud University /Nikhef, Nijmegen, 6500 GL, The Netherlands 

> ad

Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman (UTAR), Kuala Lumpur, 31900, Malaysia 

> ae

Universidad Nacional de Ingeniería, Lima, 15333, Peru 

> af

The MODE Collaboration, https: // mode-collaboration.github.io, , , Spain 

> ag

Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare - Sezione di Cagliari, Complesso Universitario di Monserrato, Monserrato (Cagliari), 09042, Italy 

> ah

University of Delaware, , Newark, , USA 

> ai

Thapar Institute of Engineering & Technology, Patiala, 147004, India 

> aj

Department of Electronic Technology, Euskal Herriko Unibertsitatea, Ingeniero Torres Quevedo Square 1, Bilbao, 48013, Basque Country, Spain 

> ak

School of Physics & Astronomy, University of Edinburgh, UK 

> al

Particle Physics Department, University of Geneva, Switzerland 

> am

Department of Physics, Sapienza University of Rome, Italy 

> an

Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare - Sezione di Roma, Italy 

> ao

School of Physics, University of Bristol, UK 

> ap

Federal Institute of Technology Zurich (ETH), Zurich, Switzerland 

> aq

CERN - European Organization for Nuclear Research, Switzerland 

> ar

Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden 

> as

Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence, Dortmund, Germany 

> at

Technical University of Munich, Department of Physics, Munich, Germany 

> arXiv:2603.26613v1 [physics.ins-det] 27 Mar 2026 au Laboratório de Instrumentação e Física de Partículas, Pheno Group, Lisbon, Portugal
> av University of Lisbon, Instituto Superior Técnico, Department of Physics, Lisbon, Portugal
> aw Centro di Ateneo di Studi e Attività Spaziali "Giuseppe Colombo", Via Venezia 15, Padova I-35131, Italy
> ax University of Warwick, , Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom

Abstract 

The optimization of large experiments in fundamental science, such as detectors for subnuclear physics at particle colliders, shares with the optimization of complex systems for industrial or societal applications the common issue of addressing the inter-relation between parameters describing the hardware used in data production and parameters used to analyse those data. While in many cases this coupling can be ignored – when the problem can be successfully factored into simpler sub-tasks and the latter addressed serially – there are situations in which that approach fails to converge to the absolute maximum of expected performance, as it results in a mis-alignment of the optimized hardware and software solutions. In this work we consider a few use cases of interest in fundamental science collected primarily from particle physics and related areas, and a pot-pourri of industrial and societal applications where the matter is similarly of relevance. We discuss the emergence of strong hardware-software coupling in some of those systems, as well as co-design procedures that may be deployed to identify the global maximum of their relevant utility functions. We observe how numerous opportunities exist to advance methods and tools for hardware-software co-design optimization, bridging fundamental science and industry through application- and challenge-driven projects, and shaping the future of scientific experiments and industrial systems. 

Keywords: optimization, co-design, hardware design, particle detectors, experiment design 

Contents 1 Introduction 4

1.1 Coupling, Decomposability and Separability . . 41.2 Optimization Strategies for Co-Design . . . . . 51.3 AI as an Enabler of Practical Co-Design . . . . 61.4 Categories of non-decomposable problems . . . 71.5 Decomposability and parametrization . . . . . 81.6 The situation outside fundamental physics . . . 81.7 Structure of this document . . . . . . . . . . . 9

2 Related Work 9

2.1 Related work in hardware-software codesign . . 92.1.1 Satellites and other space vehicles . . . 92.1.2 Robotics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92.1.3 Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 2.1.4 Particle Physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 2.1.5 Plasma Physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 2.2 Broader applications of co-design by field of application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 2.2.1 Medical and health sciences . . . . . . 11 2.2.2 Large language models . . . . . . . . . 12 

3 Co-Design in Fundamental Physics 13 

3.1 Particle tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 3.1.1 Tracking as an optimization problem . . 13 3.1.2 Persistent co-design dimensions in tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 3.1.3 Emerging directions . . . . . . . . . . 20 3.2 Calorimeters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 3.2.1 Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 3.2.2 End-to-end Optimization with AIDO . 22 3.2.3 End-to-end Bayesian Optimization . . . 24 3.2.4 End-to-end calorimeter optimization with mutual information surrogates . . 25 3.2.5 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 3.3 Ground arrays for gamma-ray astronomy . . . 27 3.3.1 Optimization of layout of shower front detectors: the case of SWGO . . . . . . 27 3.3.2 CTAO array layout optimization via Monte Carlo co-design . . . . . . . . . 30 3.4 Calibration of Cherenkov Telescope Cameras . 33 3.5 Neutrino Astronomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34 3.6 A ground array for high-energy tau neutrino de-tection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 3.7 Co-design of a Dynamic Collimation System for Spot Scanning Proton Therapy via Di ff er-entiable Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 3.7.1 System Geometry and Monte Carlo Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 3.7.2 Di ff erentiable Surrogate Model . . . . 40 3.7.3 Optimization Strategy . . . . . . . . . 40 3.7.4 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41 3.7.5 Discussion and Conclusion . . . . . . . 42 3.8 Gravitational waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 3.8.1 Multi-band gravitational-wave detectors 42 3.8.2 Gravitational-wave signals and detec-tion methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 3.8.3 Co-design in gravitational-wave detection 43 3.8.4 Machine learning methods for co-design 43 3.8.5 Practical case study . . . . . . . . . . . 44 3.9 Bridging the Hardware-Software Gap: A Case Study in Physical Generalization . . . . . . . . 45 3.10 Automatic optimization of an Optical Parallel-Plate Avalanche Counter for neutron tomography 45 23.11 Muon scattering tomography scanners . . . . . 48 3.11.1 Simultaneous optimisation of hard-ware, software, and exposure-time for contrastive imaging . . . . . . . . . . . 49 3.11.2 Hypothesis-testing loss for anomaly detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53 3.11.3 Geant 4-based hypothesis-testing co-design for the PoCA reconstruction of a concrete pillar . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55 3.11.4 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58 3.12 Other applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58 3.12.1 FPGA-Based Co-Design for Real-Time Triggers and Data Reduction . . . . . . 58 3.12.2 Co-Design and Optimization of Unsu-pervised Anomaly Detection for Real-Time FPGA Deployment . . . . . . . . 60 3.12.3 Agentic coding for experiments . . . . 60 

4 Co-Design in Industrial Applications 62 

4.1 Digital pen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62 4.1.1 Project presentation . . . . . . . . . . . 62 4.1.2 Constraints on hardware, software, and data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62 4.1.3 A priori ideas and initial design as-sumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 4.1.4 Software choices . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 4.1.5 Hardware choices . . . . . . . . . . . . 64 4.1.6 Joint hardware–software optimisation . 64 4.1.7 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65 4.2 Industrial design of hardware w.r.t. model e ffi -ciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66 4.3 Co-design in microbial metabolic modeling . . 67 4.3.1 Conceptual framework for bioprocess development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67 4.3.2 Reconstruction Tools . . . . . . . . . . 67 4.3.3 Automated Gap-Filling with Language Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67 4.3.4 Hybrid ML–LLM Pipeline for GEM Curation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68 4.3.5 LLMs in the Experimen-tal–Computational Co-Design Loop . . 68 4.3.6 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68 4.4 Benchmarking and Optimization of Deep Fea-ture Matchers for Real-Time Applications . . . 68 4.5 LLM training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71 

5 Concluding Remarks 73 

31. Introduction 

The increasing complexity of modern scientific instrumen-tation in fundamental physics and related domains poses sig-nificant challenges for system design and optimization. Large-scale experiments, such as particle detectors and astrophysical observatories, involve high-dimensional hardware and software setups. As a result, the system-level performance—such as res-olution, e ffi ciency and cost—emerges from the coupled inter-play of hardware components ( e.g. sensors, electronics, cooling and trigger systems) and software elements, including data pro-cessing, calibration and reconstruction algorithms. In addition, the underlying stochastic physics processes make the resulting system behaviour highly non-linear and often require computa-tionally expensive simulations. The traditional approach to de-sign and optimize such systems relies on sequential workflows, in which software development and tuning typically occur only after the hardware design has been finalized. This limitation has motivated growing interest in co-design 

approaches, where hardware and software parameters are treated as jointly optimizable variables. In co-design settings, design choices in one domain constrain and reshape attain-able performance in the other through shared resource budgets, non-linear performance dependencies, algorithmic sensitivity to data characteristics, and system-level constraints. When such couplings are present, serial optimization strategies may be-come much more likely to converge to suboptimal solutions (1), and a holistic optimization treatment becomes necessary to ap-proach system performance limits. In parallel with this conceptual shift, recent years have seen a rapid expansion of artificial intelligence (AI) methods across a broad range of activities in fundamental physics (2, 3), in-cluding particle and astroparticle physics, high-energy nuclear physics, neutrino experiments, gravitational-wave observato-ries, phenomenology, material science, and scientific comput-ing. AI techniques have become central to data processing, event reconstruction, simulation acceleration, and inference, fostering new collaborations that bridge traditionally distinct communities with heterogeneous methodologies, data struc-tures, and scientific objectives. Organized e ff orts such as the EUCAIF coalition 1, within which the present work was orig-inally conceived, the MODE Collaboration 2, and FastML 3,among others, exemplify this broader trend toward shared AI-driven approaches across experimental and theoretical domains. These developments have demonstrated the potential of AI to significantly enhance experimental sensitivity and to improve our understanding of physical phenomena at extreme scales, densities, and rarity. At the same time, they have highlighted the importance of viewing AI not merely as a downstream anal-ysis tool but as a component interacting with upstream design choices. Design decisions that a ff ect data quality, structure, and availability can only be meaningfully assessed in light of the full data-processing and inference pipeline, reinforcing the need for integrated hardware–software optimization strategies.  

> 1See https: // eucaif.org .
> 2See https: // mode-collaboration.github.io .
> 3See https: // fastmachinelearning.org /.

Relation to prior work and terminology. Joint optimization of interacting system components has a long history in engineer-ing, applied mathematics, and operations research, often devel-oped under di ff erent names with di ff erent emphases. Closely related formulations appear, e.g. , in the literature on Engineer-ing Design Optimization (4) or Multidisciplinary Design Op-timization (MDO) (5, 6) that couple physical design variables with algorithmic or control parameters. The usage of AI meth-ods for experiment design is also intensively studied in, e.g. ,Ref. (7). In this work, we use the term co-design to empha-size the explicit and systematic treatment of hardware and soft-ware parameters as jointly optimizable variables. Specifically, in this work we formalize hardware–software co-design within a unified optimization framework, characterize when sequential strategies may fail to reach the Pareto front, and illustrate these concepts across representative scientific and industrial systems. 

1.1. Coupling, Decomposability and Separability 

We formalize the co-design problem as an optimization task over two classes of design variables: hardware parameters 

h ∈ H and software parameters s ∈ S . Let the feasible set be F ⊆ H × S , allowing for both domain-specific and coupled constraints. System performance is summarized by an objective (or loss) function min  

> (h,s)∈F

f (h, s),

where f may be non-convex, non-smooth, noisy, and defined only implicitly through simulation or experimental evaluation. For example, the objective may be a monotonic function of a system-specific utility, and its global minimum corresponds with the optimal co-design. For clarity, we assume that the ob-jective function has a unique global minimum, however, all con-clusions are applicable for the multiple local minima settings. To understand the necessity of joint optimization of hardware and software, we first consider optimization problems in which hardware can be optimized independently from the software or 

vice versa . Formally, for any su ffi ciently regular optimization problem, hardware and software optimizations can be decou-pled if one considers marginalized objective functions: 

fh(s) = min  

> h

f (h, s); fs(h) = min  

> s

f (h, s); 

s∗ = arg min 

> s

fh(s); h∗ = arg min 

> h

fs(h).

While such marginalized objectives formally exist, they are rarely practical: computing marginals via inner optimization eff ectively amounts to coupled optimization, and the bounds fh

or fs are seldom known analytically. In such coupled settings, sequential strategies are known to tend to find suboptimal solu-tions (1). Nonetheless, in some scenarios, a monotone transfor-mation of the bounds is known. As an example, consider a re-gression problem x → y where the target y deterministically de-pends on the ground-truth event ˆ x, y = g0( ˆ x), the measurement 

x is noisy, with x ∼ N  ˆx, σ 2(h), where the noise variance de-pends on the design h. While the exact bounds are, in general, analytically intractable, it is clear that, for a su ffi ciently pow-erful estimator g (x | h), the performance of the system strictly 4increases with decreasing σ2(h), thus, the optimal hardware de-sign can be obtained without considering the estimator. How-ever, such examples are rare. Consider the following common extension of the example above — a complex noise model with additive and multiplicative components: x = εm ˆx + εa, where 

εm ∼ LogNormal 0, σ 2

> m

(h) and εa ∼ N (0 , σ 2

> a

(h)). In this case, the optimal hardware configuration can be determined indepen-dently only if h∗ can simultaneously minimize σ2

> m

(h) and σ2

> a

(h), otherwise the estimator must be considered to resolve the trade-off between di ff erent types of noises. In practice, the marginalization bounds are frequently re-placed by heuristic estimates derived from the expert knowl-edge. For example, A. Baranov et al. (8) optimize the muon shield design of the proposed CERN SHiP experiment (9) (see Sec. 2.1.4 for details). The goal of the muon shield is to deflect a large background muon flux away from the detector, improv-ing the signal significance. Evaluation of this metric is compu-tationally costly and the authors use a loss function based on an analytical expression for muon “importance weights”, e ff ec-tively estimating impact on the signal significance by a simple, but well-motivated heuristic. As we show in this work, such heuristics often lead to improvements over the baseline designs, but often fall short of the principled co-design approach. In general, marginalized objectives or their monotone trans-formations are not easily accessible, thus, we consider only 

practically decoupled problems, to which we refer as sequen-tial. 

Definition 1. An optimization problem f (h, s) → min is called sequential if, for any initial (h0, s0) ∈ H × S , either: h∗ = arg min 

> h

f (h, s0); 

s∗ = arg min 

> s

f (h∗, s),

or s∗ = arg min 

> s

f (h0, s); 

h∗ = arg min 

> h

f (h, s∗).

achieves the global minimum (h∗, s∗) = arg min f (h, s).

It is worth noting that some problems admit only a single order of optimization steps. A simple analytical example of such a problem is shown in Fig. 1a. A frequently appearing class of optimization problems is block-decomposable problems. 

Definition 2. An optimization problem is called block-decomposable if the objective function can be represented as: f (h, s) = Φ (A(h), B(s)) ; 

where Φ(·, ·) is monotonically increasing in each argument. 

A common subclass of block-decomposable problems is block-separable problems: f (h, s) = Ψ (A(h) + B(s)), where Ψ(·) is an increasing function. Due to the monotonicity of function Φ, a block-decomposable problem can be replaced by two independent problems: 

h∗, s∗ = arg min f (h, s) ⇐⇒ 



h∗ = arg min h A(h); 

s∗ = arg min s B(s); therefore, block-decomposable problems are a subclass of se-quential problems. It is worth noting that not all sequential problems are block-decomposable. An example of such a func-tion is shown in Fig. 1b. By contrast, in non-block-decomposable problems, the ob-jective or the feasible set contains genuine coupling between h

and s. A simple illustrative model is 

f (h, s) = A(h) + B(s) + h⊤ Ms ,

where M is a coupling matrix, and the interaction term h⊤ Ms 

encodes cross-dependence between hardware and software pa-rameters. When such terms are present, improvements in one parameter block depend on the value of the other, and inde-pendent optimization is generally suboptimal. Non-zero mixed partial derivatives provide a local diagnostic of coupling in a given parameterization, although such tests are not invariant un-der monotone reparametrizations of the objective and therefore do not constitute a general separability criterion. A useful quantitative measure of coupling impact is the sub-optimality ratio 

S R = fjoint 

E(h0,s0)∼P

 fserial (h0, s0) , (1) where fjoint is the optimal value obtained by joint optimization and the denominator denotes the expected objective value ob-tained by a prescribed serial procedure initialized from a refer-ence distribution P over feasible starting points. Values signifi-cantly above unity (for maximization problems, or below unity for minimization) indicate substantial performance loss from neglecting coupling. 

1.2. Optimization Strategies for Co-Design 

Di ff erent optimization strategies correspond to di ff erent as-sumptions about coupling strength and computational tractabil-ity. 

Staged (one-pass) optimization. In staged workflows, one block of variables is optimized once while the other is fixed, and the result is then frozen. For example, hardware parame-ters are first selected by minimizing f (h, s0) for a reference soft-ware configuration s0, after which software parameters are op-timized with hardware fixed. This approach reflects traditional engineering pipelines, and is appropriate only when coupling is weak or the problem is block-decomposable. In strongly cou-pled settings, staged optimization typically produces subopti-mal designs because early decisions are not revisited. 5(a) An example of sequential functions that admits only a single order of optimiza-tion steps. (b) An example of sequential but not block-decomposable problem.     

> Figure 1: Simple examples of di ff erent classes of optimization problems. For visual clarity, levels are scaled uniformly in log (1 +f(h,s)).

Block-iterative optimization. Block-iterative methods alternate between updates of hardware and software parameter blocks, enabling feedback between design layers. Given ( h(t), s(t)), a generic block coordinate scheme performs updates of the form 

s(t+1) ≈ arg min 

> s:( h(t),s)∈F

f (h(t), s),

h(t+1) ≈ arg min 

> h:( h,s(t+1) )∈F

f (h, s(t+1) ),

where block subproblems are solved either exactly or approxi-mately. When each block is minimized to high accuracy, the method corresponds to block Gauss–Seidel alternating mini-mization; when only descent steps are taken ( e.g. , gradient or surrogate-based steps), one obtains inexact block coordi-nate descent methods (10, 11). These approaches are widely used when joint optimization is computationally prohibitive, but they may converge slowly or become trapped in poor sta-tionary points in non-decomposable, non-convex problems. 

Joint optimization. Joint methods update hardware and soft-ware parameters simultaneously in the combined space. In smooth continuous settings, a prototype update is joint gradi-ent descent, 

h(t+1) 

s(t+1) 

!

= h(t)

s(t)

!

− α(t)∇ f h(t), s(t),

while in black-box or mixed discrete–continuous settings, derivative-free, surrogate-based, or evolutionary strategies are used (12, 13). Joint methods can follow coupled descent di-rections and are, in principle, best suited to strongly interacting design variables, but they are often the most computationally demanding. An illustration of the results achievable by these optimization schemes in non-block-separable and block-separable problems is provided in Fig. 2 

1.3. AI as an Enabler of Practical Co-Design 

Although the mathematical structure of coupled optimization problems is well understood, practical co-design faces chal-lenges that go beyond formal optimization frameworks. Ob-jectives are frequently simulation-based and noisy; evaluations are expensive; design spaces are high-dimensional and include discrete and constrained variables; and expert knowledge is of-ten embedded in iterative human workflows rather than explicit models. Recent advances in AI provide new tools to address these challenges. Machine Learning (ML) methods enable surro-gate modeling of expensive simulations, learned performance predictors, adaptive sampling of large parameter spaces, and data-driven discovery of design trade-o ff s. These capabilities make joint and block-iterative optimization strategies computa-tionally feasible in regimes where classical approaches are in-tractable. At the same time, ensuring that AI methods enforce physical constraints and are robust, interpretable, and trustwor-thy is critical in scientific and safety-relevant systems. The purpose of this work is not to propose a single univer-sal optimization algorithm, but to clarify the structure of hard-ware–software co-design problems, relate them to established optimization strategies, and assess where modern AI meth-ods provide meaningful leverage. Through representative use cases, we identify when co-design is essential, when staged ap-proaches su ffi ce, and what open challenges remain at the in-terface of physics, engineering, and data-driven optimization. This will be the focus of Sections 2 to 4. 6Figure 2: Schematic of the result of optimization schemes on block-separable (left) and non-block-separable (center and right) problems. The elliptic contours identify points at same value of the utility. On the left, in a separable problem a hardware optimization (vertical arrow) followed by a software tuning (horizontal arrow) will always reach the highest value of the utility. At the center and on the right, in a non-separable problem the outcome of that modus operandi will depend on the initial software chosen for the hardware parameters scan – here exemplified as four equispaced initial parameter values on the horizontal axis. On the right, gradient descent on the full space identifies the global extremum of the utility. 

1.4. Categories of non-decomposable problems 

For problems that are not block-decomposable, non-block-diagonal elements exist in the corresponding objective func-tions. These elements often arise from common underlying causes that can be categorized into several principal cases, as outlined below. 

• presence of joint resource constraints, e.g. in a system where a complex algorithm performs an iterative optimiza-tion with final performance depending on the total num-ber of iterations, and the latter is constrained by hardware clock and /or memory bandwidth; or when software hyper-parameters (such as batch size) interact with GPU mem-ory size in the training of a ML model. In these situations, hardware and software parameters may still be separable in the utility, but the feasible set fulfilling the budget con-straints is coupled; 

• factors in the utility that couple hardware and software pa-rameters through a non-linear dependence, such as a ratio. 

e.g. , in a telescope where one wants the best possible angu-lar resolution, aperture D (a hardware parameter) defines the theoretical limit on the resolution, but the end result de-pends on a noise-robust deblurring performed by software deconvolution. One may define 

U(D, ξ ) = 1(λ/ D) f (ξ) , (2) where λ is light wavelength and f (ξ) describes the deblur-ring factor. In reality, f will depend on D, too, as decon-volution works better at higher signal-to-noise ratio. The interaction of the two terms does not allow decomposition of the objective; 

• multiplicative terms that couple hardware and software pa-rameters also arise in many systems where energy con-sumption is relevant. The hardware power draw of an edge device (such as a small sensor or a wearable device) may scale with clock cycles or voltage; software runtime t will scale with the algorithm parameters ξ, but also on the hard-ware features θ, e.g. in a ratio 

t(θ, ξ ) = O(ξ)/T (θ) , (3) where O(·) defines the operations and T (·) the through-put, and when the latter depends on frequency, memory, and other hardware parameters. Energy consumption com-bines these factors in a non-decomposable product through the hidden cross-dependencies of parameters. It should be noted that while a log-transform could make the utility ad-ditive, the presence of constraints will usually hamper se-rial optimization of these systems; 

• systems where e ff ective performance is the inverse of the maximum latency of a process which compounds a hardware-driven and a software-driven part: max /min op-erators couple the two domains and does not allow de-composition. A classical example in this category is the trigger system of a particle collider. The set of require-ments posed by the data acquisition system on high-rate input data coming from particle collisions risk producing an impedance mismatch of the latency of a separately de-signed hardware-based low-level trigger system and the successively optimized software latency resulting from al-gorithms sorting out the pre-filtered data, resulting in sub-optimal overall system performance; 

• experiments where systematic uncertainties on a parame-ter of interest x (the scientific target) depend on detector design parameters θ (such as segmentation, material bud-get, acceptance, resolutions, geometry, calibration hard-ware), as well as on software parameters ξ (present in re-construction algorithms, calibration constants, ML mod-els). Utility in this case could be expressed as 7U(θ, ξ ) = 1

σ2

> stat

(θ, ξ ) + σ2

> syst

(θ, ξ ) , (4) where statistical and systematic uncertainties both a ff ect precision of inference on x. Coupling of hardware and software optimization exists even in cases when the sta-tistical uncertainty is solely dependent on hardware pa-rameters ( e.g. effi ciency, acceptance), as systematic un-certainties almost invariably produce a strong coupling be-tween hardware and software. A classical example of this interplay in a particle collider setup is jet energy scale calibration, which is a ff ected by hardware choices (both calorimeter design and tracking performance, as the lat-ter influences inter-calibrations) and clustering and cali-bration algorithms. The above is an incomplete list, and should only be meant as an introductory glance at the diversity of situations where co-design is an unavoidable paradigm in the way to the search for a global optimum. Without the ambition of being exhaus-tive, in this document we will focus in more depth on a few key examples from scientific and industrial research, to unearth not only the existence of hardware-software coupling, but to try and assess how far from unity the ratio S R of Eq. 1 may result from a disjoint optimization of the di ff erent parts of the systems under consideration. While only a complete treatment of those optimization problems may allow precise estimates of the related value of the sub-optimality ratio S R , we believe that even a rougher back-of-the-envelope calculation is quite useful in directing researchers, given the resource-intensive nature of holistic optimization solutions. 

1.5. Decomposability and parametrization 

In some cases, a co-design optimization problem can be re-duced to a decomposable problem even if the original problem is not decomposable. As a clear example, consider the straw tracker from the proposed Search for Hidden Particles (SHiP) experiment (9). The straw tracker is a gaseous drift detector based on straw tubes. Its design consists of two tracking tele-scopes located in the vacuum vessel, upstream and downstream of the magnet, and each composed of two tracking stations. Each station has several layers of five-meter-long tubes; within each station, the layers are arranged into four views, in a Y-U-V-Y pattern, where U and V are stereo views with straws rotated by a small angle ±θ around the Z-axis with respect to the Y-measuring straws. The tracker aims to accurately recon-struct the decay vertex, the mass, and the impact parameter of the hidden particle trajectory. Station positions and the stereo angle are the geometric variables that impact the detector per-formance most significantly. Consider the task of optimizing the geometry of the tracker; the objective function can be written as following: 

f (h, s) = E 

> x,y∼P(x,y|h)

l (gs(x), y) ; where y denotes the target properties ( e.g. , decay vertex, mass), 

x the response of the detector with geometry h, gs(·) the recon-struction algorithm with parameters s, and l(·, ·) the loss func-tion ( e.g. , mean squared error). When using machine-learning algorithms for reconstruction, it is natural to represent the detector response as a vector x =

{vi}Ni=1 where each component vi represents the signal reported by the i-th straw, a binary indicator in the simplest case (14). In this parameterization the optimal reconstruction parameters 

s change as the detector geometry changes; thus, the detector design h is coupled with the reconstruction parameters s, mak-ing the problem, in general, non-decomposable — the recon-struction algorithm must be tuned to account for changes of the geometry. There are general-purpose reconstruction algorithm, which typically fit particle trajectories to the observed points (15, 16). Such algorithms often operate with a di ff erent parameteriza-tion, which for the straw tracker might take the form x =

{(ai, bi, ri, vi)}Ni=1 where ai, bi ∈ R3 are the endpoints of the i-th tube, ri is its radius and vi is the recorded signal. In this repre-sentation, the geometry is included into the event description; and the algorithm is e ff ectively “pre-adjusted” for any possi-ble detector design. The parameters s may depend on distribu-tions of vertices, particle momenta or properties of the magnet, but these are independent of the detector geometry. As a re-sult, such fit-based reconstruction algorithms are universal in this sense, and because the software does not need to be modi-fied when the hardware changes, the problem becomes trivially decomposable. This example demonstrates that decomposabil-ity of a co-design optimization problem in some cases depends on the parametrization: in these scenarios, it may be possible to decouple hardware and software. However, as examples in this work demonstrate, such reparametrization is not always feasi-ble or practically relevant. 

1.6. The situation outside fundamental physics 

There is a clear convergence in the literature of the past decade on hardware-software co-design as a means to maxi-mize performance (17). In high-end scientific computing, for example, co-design ensures that the next generation of super-computers and their software ecosystems evolve in tandem (18). Another area where co-design has been identified as a crucial element for the design of cyber-physical and control systems, where a strong coupling between physical dynamics and dig-ital infrastructure demands joint communication-control solu-tions for robustness (19, 20). Further, in emerging edge com-puting deployments, the need to align application logic and network and hardware capabilities is seen today as the logi-cal pathway to meet the strict latency and reliability goals of these systems (21). Similarly, in the context of the internet of things, joint optimization of sensing hardware and algorithms pushes the boundary of e ffi ciency and performance of these de-vices (22). Overall, it is clear that the co-design paradigm has increas-ingly emerged over the years as a necessary ingredient in the conception and optimization of all systems complex enough to instantiate cross-talk between their hardware and software el-ements (17, 23, 22, 24). A growing body of related work, to which we will return in more detail in Sec. 2 below, provides both methodological frameworks and case-study evidence to guide the e ff ective design of future projects. 81.7. Structure of this document 

This work is organized as follows. In Sec. 2 we examine existing literature in co-design, and provide a brief survey of relevant optimization e ff orts for scientific experiments and for industrial use cases recently reported in the literature, with the purpose of taking a snapshot of the current level of complexity of the deployed models. The comparison highlights the exis-tence of a significant gap, which is mainly due to the di ff erent amount of resources available in the two domains. We finally off er a concise description of the main methods that can be used for co-design optimization problems. In Sec. 3 we discuss a number of use-cases in experimental physics, reviewing bene-fits and /or necessity of a holistic hardware-software optimisa-tion in detection and physics reconstruction with several exam-ples: cases include particle physics tracking (a highly complex and CPU-demanding task), the usage of Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA) for real-time online selection, coding op-portunities and risks of employing Large Language Models (LLM) in modern large experiments, the non-factorizability of the experimental setup in the calibration of Cherenkov tele-scope cameras, the joint optimisation of geometry and layout for an ultra-high-energy neutrino observatory, and the coherent optimisation of hardware and software for muon tomography or for the detection of gravitational waves. In Sec. 4 we echo the structure of Sec. 3 by dealing with a small set of industrial applications where co-design is important. These examples are not exhaustive, because the focus of this document is on funda-mental science rather than industry; rather, they are presented for the purpose of illustrating the di ff erent issues arising in typ-ical industrial settings, and the limited amount of synergy they off er with co-design problems in scientific experimentation. We provide some concluding remarks in Sec. 5. 

2. Related Work 

The present work focuses on contributions to hardware-software co-design in fundamental physics and industrial ap-plications. However, the concept of co-design has been applied to other fields as well, where the object of the co-design has been not only the interplay between hardware and software, but also the broader interplay between stakeholders, the one between experiment and simulation, and the one involved in AI-assisted automation. In this section, we provide therefore a overview of the existing works that we consider most rele-vant for both hardware-software co-design and co-design in the broader sense. 

2.1. Related work in hardware-software codesign 

We overview here relevant works in the field of hardware-software optimization in fundamental physics and industrial ap-plications. These works are directly related to the activities we describe in Sec. 3 onwards. 

2.1.1. Satellites and other space vehicles 

Although not explicitly named as such, co-design was an es-sential component of the success of several earth observation satellite programs of the European Space Agency (ESA), such as the Phi-Sat and Sentinel programs. Satellites have strict lim-its on power, mass, thermal budget, communication bandwidth, processing power, and storage. Software, especially AI and ML applications, must be optimized to run e ffi ciently under these constraints. In Ref. (25), the authors discuss onboard processing in satellite-borne synthetic aperture radar technology, highlight-ing the need to optimize the use of limited storage and band-width to reduce downlinked data volume. The authors review several techniques that can be used for this purpose, including deep learning. The authors conclude that onboard processing improves performance in the field of remote sensing, especially in real-time processing, impacting areas such as disaster moni-toring and global security. The study in Ref. (26) presents the data transformations and autocalibration of a Sentinel-2 (S-2) end-to-end model proces-sor, an onboard cloud detection and atmospheric correction pro-cessor. The proposed approach employs two independent con-volutional neural networks: the first one classifies clouds and cloud shadows, the second one emulates the operational soft-ware developed by the ESA. The proposed model is shown to provide up to a tenfold speed reduction, surpassing existing al-gorithms. 

2.1.2. Robotics 

Co-design can also be important in robotics, where good per-formance necessitates a tight coupling between physical mech-anisms, sensing, and control. Hardware alone cannot guaran-tee agility, e ffi ciency, or robustness, and software cannot com-pensate for physical limitations that could have been avoided through better design choices. Joint optimization of the various components involved in robots can achieve higher performance with lower energy use, reduced complexity, and greater relia-bility. In Ref. (27) the authors employ co-design in the optimization of stochastic partial di ff erential equations for the design of ac-tuators. They propose an episodic reinforcement optimization strategy which combines policy network optimization with ac-tuator design optimization. The applicability of the approach is demonstrated through several successful experiments on a com-plex non-linear 2D second-order stochastic partial di ff erential equation model of a soft-robotic limb. In a characteristic example of co-design, the study in Ref. (28) presents the joint optimization of hardware and con-trol to improve the energy e ffi ciency of complex legged robots. A stochastic programming approach was employed to co-optimize robot morphology, a nominal trajectory, and a feed-back control policy, and can be employed across di ff erent lo-comotion scenarios. The optimization framework is demon-strated using the MIT mini cheetah robot, where it led to an up to 17.4% energy reduction with the robot executing trotting gaits. 92.1.3. Imaging 

Co-design is also emerging in imaging applications, where optical hardware and computational algorithms are jointly op-timized for the overall system performance. Metasurfaces are ultrathin structures composed of subwavelength elements that have revolutionized light manipulation by enabling precise con-trol over electromagnetic waves characteristics such as ampli-tude, phase, polarization, and spectral properties while main-taining a very compact form factor. Among the various planar devices based on metasurfaces, metalenses have been gaining prominence for the development of ultracompact imaging sys-tems; they have enabled highly miniaturized optical systems compared to conventional optics, commonly known as metaop-tics (29, 30), which is essential for integration into portable de-vices for di ff erent applications such as augmented /virtual real-ity, drones, and healthcare devices (31, 32, 33). Concurrently, computational imaging leverages algorithms to reconstruct im-ages from optically processed signals, overcoming limitations of traditional imaging systems (34). A synergistic co-design of metaoptics (hardware) and com-putational imaging (software) which combines the physical wavefront shaping ability of metalenses with advanced compu-tational algorithms, has the potential to enhance imaging per-formance beyond conventional limits, enabling improved res-olution, reduced system size, and enhanced functionality (35, 36). The design of metalenses requires the use of multiscale electromagnetic approaches as ray tracing and Maxwell’s equa-tions solvers (33). Metalenses can be represented at the ray trac-ing level as phase functions that need to be then implemented in actual hardware ( e.g. , unit cell structures). Other optical technologies exist as refractive, di ff ractive and freeform optics which can be included into the hardware-software co-design framework. Working with mathematical phase functions, for example at the ray tracing level, enables a design step that de-composes the optical design into a set of phase functions that can be then implemented in hardware by exploring the set of existing technologies as metaoptics, refractive, di ff ractive and freeform optics or hybrid combinations (37, 33). Such an ap-proach can mitigate curse of dimensionality issues related to the number of design parameters, provide greater flexibility in selecting the appropriate hardware optical components and en-sure that the optical system is optimized for performance, form factor, cost, and manufacturability. 

2.1.4. Particle Physics 

In particle physics, detector optimization is an iterative pro-cess involving simulations of di ff erent detector geometries with various technology choices and reconstruction algorithms to evaluate trade-o ff s among detector performance, cost, and other system-level challenges such as cooling and readout, defining a multi-objective optimization problem. The first AI-based strategies for detector optimization were sequential, see Fig. 3: the AI elements of the pipeline are de-coupled from the main simulation-reconstruction chain and act merely as an explorer of the phase space to suggest configu-rations that are then simulated and reconstructed by the main pipeline. AID2E (39) is an AI-assisted detector design frame-

> Figure 3: Workflow of AI-assisted detector design (38).

work that has been established to realise the full potential of AI in detector design at Electron–Ion Collider (EIC). AID2E integrates a variety of AI techniques, including surrogate mod-eling, Bayesian optimization, and reinforcement learning, to optimize detector performance while minimizing the number of expensive simulations required. The framework has been successfully applied to optimize the design of the EIC tracking system (38), demonstrating significant improvements in perfor-mance metrics such as momentum resolution and tracking e ffi -ciency compared to traditional design approaches, resulting, for example, in a 10% improvement in the resolution of the π+ K−

invariant mass. The success of AID2E highlights the transfor-mative potential of AI in accelerating the design process and achieving superior detector performance in particle physics ex-periments. One of the earliest concrete applications of machine learn-ing to particle physics instrumentation was the optimization of the muon shield for the SHiP experiment (40). The goal of the muon shield is to suppress the muon flux emerging from a high-intensity proton beam dump by approximately six or-ders of magnitude using a sequence of tapered magnetic el-ements. The shield consists of multiple magnets, each de-scribed by several geometric parameters, resulting in a high-dimensional and strongly constrained optimization problem with highly non-linear dependencies. Initial design studies em-ployed Bayesian optimization to e ffi ciently explore this com-plex design space (8). Similar techniques were also applied at the EIC (41), providing another early example of AI-driven de-tector design in particle physics. Subsequent SHiP studies made a step forward by proposing a gradient-based methodology where a generative adversarial network served as a di ff erentiable surrogate for stochastic sim-ulations (42) produced using the G eant 4 toolkit (43, 44, 45). Gradients are propagated directly backwards through the re-construction and simulation chain, using the surrogate. This methodology was demonstrated on many examples, including the aforementioned muon shield, and enabled full end-to-end optimization via backpropagation across the design workflow, substantially reducing iteration time. Building on this work, further e ff orts demonstrated making the simulation code it-self di ff erentiable (46) through operator overloading, as well as the continued use of surrogates (47). Two recent reviews ex-10 plored the use of di ff erentiable programming for end-to-end op-timization, following work produced by members of the MODE Collaboration (48, 49). On the software design for detector optimization, gradient based adaptation of AI-based particle reconstruction across detector geometries has also been ex-plored (50). More recently, to complement di ff erentiable methods and to address certain limitations, such as sensitivity to local opti-mization and challenges in handling discrete design choices, the use of reinforcement learning was explored in Ref. (51). These studies considered the optimization of both calorimeter and spectrometer designs. Subsequently, LLMs have also been investigated in this con-text (52), demonstrating their potential both as standalone de-sign agents and in combination with a trust-region optimizer. This approach suggests a role for LLMs as high-level planners that guide specialized optimization methods such as reinforce-ment learning. 

2.1.5. Plasma Physics 

The vast majority of baryonic matter in the universe exists in a fourth state of matter known as plasma, spanning systems from the Sun and nearby stars to the interstellar and intergalac-tic media. Accurate modeling of these ubiquitous plasma states is therefore essential. Traditionally, plasma dynamics are mod-eled using the magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) framework (53), in which collisional processes dominate, allowing the plasma to be treated as a quasi-neutral fluid. This description is es-sentially an extension of neutral fluid dynamics, augmented by the Lorentz force and Maxwell’s equations. However, many plasma systems often exist in weakly collisional or collisionless regimes, where the assumptions underlying MHD break down. Examples include the solar wind, planetary magnetospheres, the interstellar medium, and the intergalactic medium. This necessitates the use of a kinetic description, in which the sta-tistical dynamics of ions and electrons are tracked separately as particles, rather than being represented by a single fluid model. The particle-in-cell (PIC) method is a widely used numerical approach for simulating such kinetic plasmas in space and as-trophysical systems. In PIC simulations, the dynamics of macro particles are self-consistently tracked in the presence of electric and magnetic fields. However, as system size grows, simula-tions of these kinetic systems become computationally expen-sive due to the large separation between the spatial and temporal scales of interest. A significant portion of the community e ff ort is therefore devoted to accelerating these simulations through massive parallelization across multiple compute nodes, with re-cent e ff orts leveraging graphics processing units (GPUs) accel-eration to further enhance performance. While the traditional PIC method maps well to the highly parallel structure of mod-ern computing architectures, inter-accelerator communication remains a significant bottleneck. To address these issues, more recently, studies have explored co-design approaches that opti-mize algorithms jointly with hardware and underlying physics to accelerate the complex dynamics inherent in kinetic plasma simulations (54, 55). These approaches are becoming increas-ingly relevant as modern computational systems grow more heterogeneous, combining CPUs with GPUs, tensor process-ing units (TPUs) and other domain-specific processors. Conse-quently, there is a growing need for co-design approaches that can fully exploit the potential of these accelerators. A recent study (54) co-designed a PIC method while explic-itly considering the architecture of the available accelerators such as many-integrated cores (MIC) coprocessors and GPUs. In their design, they employed a scale-bridging technique that couples a lower-order (LO) and higher-order (HO) moment-based scheme, isolating the maximum amount of computation on a single accelerator and minimizing inter-device communi-cation. In this formulation, the LO scheme essentially solves the discretized fluid equation, while the HO scheme handles the Vlasov equation coupled with Maxwell’s equations. This hierarchical approach aligns naturally with the architecture of modern computational systems and accurately predicts macro-scopic plasma behavior arising from microscopic e ff ects. While the framework is designed to support accelerators like GPUs and MIC co-processors, the initial results demonstrated the ef-ficacy of this approach on multi-core CPUs, showing the ability to isolate large amounts of work with minimal communication. Overall, the study illustrates that through a co-design process, kinetic PIC simulations can achieve high performance on multi-core systems without sacrificing portability. 

2.2. Broader applications of co-design by field of application 

When we don’t limit ourselves to hardware-software co-design, we can identify several fields of application where co-design is applied to the interplay between stakeholders, be-tween experiment and simulation, and the one involved in AI-assisted automation. In this section, we highlight the most rel-evant examples of this broader definition of co-design, catego-rized by main field of application. One of the main reasons of the widespread popularity of co-design across several fields of science is its value in interdisci-plinary research, where combining the knowledge of scientists from di ff erent fields is essential for the success of the project. Involving stakeholders, such as end users and policy makers, is especially important in research with direct applications. As a result, co-design approaches are commonly used in large-scale projects, e.g. , in medical and health sciences (56), and environ-mental and climate research (57). 

2.2.1. Medical and health sciences 

Applied research in the medical and health sciences has sev-eral constraints that must be considered for results to be appli-cable in practice. Health infrastructure, including both equip-ment and qualified personnel, is always a limiting factor in the applicability of the research. Health solutions have to be acces-sible to all intended users, especially patients with disabilities and chronic health problems. Finally, policy makers influence health infrastructure at multiple levels. Successful health in-terventions require the involvement of all these stakeholders, making co-design approaches desirable. In recent years, fund-ing bodies and policy makers have became more aware of the importance of involving stakeholders to ensure the outcomes of 11 research projects stay relevant to end users, resulting in sev-eral successful examples in Europe and beyond. An early, but widely used approach is the Experience-based co-design (ECBD) framework ( e.g. , 58, 59, 60), which has many success-ful applications. One example aims at improving post-stroke rehabilitation in Denmark (58), involving stroke survivors, their relatives, med-ical professionals, app developers, and researchers, and em-ploying the ECBD framework to design two mobile applica-tions. Co-design is crucial in this application because it directly addresses a long-standing problem in stroke care: fragmented rehabilitation across hospitals, municipal services, and home settings. Participants reported that their views were heard and valued, contributing to outcomes better aligned with end-user needs. Another application focuses on cardiovascular diseases, one of the leading causes of morbidity and mortality globally. In Ref. (59) the authors employ ECBD to tackle the chal-lenges in cardiovascular and chronic disease nursing. Tradi-tional approaches in this area often rely on professional per-spectives or quantitative data alone. The introduction of co-design was essential to bridge the gap between clinical expertise and patient lived experiences. The findings of the study created greater empathy and engagement for sta ff , as well as insight into patient priorities allowing for more person-centered support. Developing actionable research outputs in environmental and climate research requires collaboration between academia, in-dustry and public policy. Employing co-design in this area makes it possible to integrate experiences from these stakehold-ers, building trust with them, resulting in better applicability of the results ( e.g. , 61, 62, 63). Environmental and climate re-search a ff ects multiple aspects of life, including public health, and safe and sustainable industry practices, and is becoming increasingly relevant with the ongoing climate crisis. A multi-year international European project has created rec-ommendations for managing occupational heat stress (61). Weather extremes pose a challenge for a broad range of work-ers, but especially those who work outdoors and /or with protec-tive equipment. Potential complications include cardiovascular conditions, respiratory problems, and kidney disease. The au-thors highlight the necessity of employing a co-design approach that involves multi-disciplinary experts from academia, policy makers in the public sector, and stakeholders from industrial collaborators, in order to create recommendations that follow state-of-the-art scientific standards, but are also relevant for and applicable to actual, real-life working environments. In Ref. (62), the authors demonstrate their work on designing an app aiming at reducing energy consumption to mitigate the climate footprint of individual users in Switzerland. Taking a participatory approach, the authors involve the intended users of the app to co-design it, allowing the project to capture user motivations, constraints, insights, and address knowledge gaps. Co-design is combined with the Model of Action Phases frame-work (64) from the behavioral sciences to create an app that supports the motivation of users, guides them towards concrete action, and helps sustain behavioral changes. The authors high-light that the co-design process enabled them to design better interventions that feel more personal, contextual, and achiev-able. 

2.2.2. Large language models 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently emerged as a powerful cognitive tool to assist and optimize several aspects of human life and thinking. In the field of co-design, LLMs can be agents or tools to co-design a certain system, or can be themselves objects of co-design. When used for hardware-software co-design and system-level optimizaiton, LLMs enable reasoning over heterogeneous sources such as hardware specifications, software kernels, com-piler intermediate representations, operational logs, and design constraints to support joint optimization strategies. Unlike tra-ditional workflows that rely primarily on manual exploration of design spaces or heuristic optimization, LLMs can interpret and generate code in hardware description languages, assist in hardware-aware software generation, and provide design sug-gestions that balance performance, power, latency, and resource utilization (65, 66, 67). For example, LLM fine-tuning on Ver-ilog datasets has been shown to improve Verilog code genera-tion quality compared to untuned models, demonstrating poten-tial for automating parts of digital design tasks such as register-transfer level generation and functional templates (68, 66). Recent work has also introduced LLM-based high-level syn-thesis frameworks that combine LLM reasoning with design space exploration tools to translate high-level software code into synthesizable hardware accelerators, reducing manual ef-fort in mapping sequential code to hybrid CPU–FPGA imple-mentations (69). Broader survey studies on LLM-centric hard-ware and software co-design highlight how LLMs can be inte-grated into design automation workflows, covering algorithm optimization, hardware generation, and system-level innova-tions tailored to the unique characteristics and constraints of large neural models and their deployment environments (65). In addition, benchmarks and tooling e ff orts for evaluating LLM performance on hardware design tasks ( e.g. , Verilog code gen-eration and reasoning about post-synthesis metrics) are emerg-ing, providing structured ways to assess how well models can support hardware-software co-design decisions (70, 71, 72). These developments indicate that LLMs – especially when adapted to hardware domains through fine-tuning, domain-specific datasets, or hybrid reasoning pipelines – are becoming an important component of hardware-software co-design work-flows, helping bridge high-level design intent and low-level im-plementation choices. From a methodological perspective, LLMs can be objects of co-design themselves: in addition to deployment-time hardware–software optimization, we can therefore consider training-time co-design principles that jointly couple model scale, hardware compute, and data volume, as established by recent industrial LLM studies. These works demonstrate that compute-optimal training requires balanced scaling of parame-ters, data, and hardware resources, with direct implications for energy consumption and system e ffi ciency (73, 74, 75). The de-tailed treatment of training-scale co-design, including scaling laws and energy–CO 2 considerations, is provided in Sec. 4.5. 12 3. Co-Design in Fundamental Physics 

In this Section we examine a variety of typical design prob-lems arising in experiments for fundamental physics studies, with the purpose of characterizing them according to presence of non-diagonal elements in their specifiable utility. For some of the less complex applications we also manage to present quantitative results on the e ff ectiveness of di ff erent optimiza-tion approaches. 

3.1. Particle tracking 

We define tracking detector a device designed to detect the trajectory of charged particles by means of ionization pro-duced when they interact with the atoms of the detector ma-terial. These devices are essential to nearly all modern particle-physics experiments, but they are also of primary importance for detectors finding applications in space, nuclear physics, and medical domains. Here we wish to discuss what are the hardware-software co-design principles that govern their per-formance. We will deliberately restrict our consideration to silicon-based detectors to allow a semi-quantitative discussion, meanwhile trying to keep the insights as general as possible. The key question we are interested in discussing here is, in typ-ical situations, whether sensor geometry, materials, electromag-netic fields, and readout schemes (which are elements required to define the detector hardware during the design phase) can be e ff ectively optimized individually, while software aspects are left to be defined at a later stage. Depending on the spe-cific application, the latter usually includes track seeding proce-dures, pattern recognition, track fitting and trajectory cleaning, data-driven detector alignment procedures, background identi-fication and removal. On the other hand, if the precise defi-nition of detector hardware limits the space of software solu-tions, thereby limiting the final attainable performance of the instrument, then sequential, separate optimization of these two components is not optimal, and hence co-design procedures be-comes crucial. 

3.1.1. Tracking as an optimization problem 

Particle tracking can be viewed as a fitting and inference task performed on discrete, noisy sensor data. The complexity of this task stems from confounding factors from physical e ff ects. Incident particles interact with the sensing material to gener-ate signals for tracking, however, they also interact with other detector components, left unwanted e ff ects on the trajectory to be corrected. Moreover, all these interactions are inherently stochastic. Detector ine ffi ciencies, which must be accounted for in tracking, arise from imperfections in the sensing materials, radiation damage, or construction tolerances. Hit ambiguities result from multiple particles traversing the same detection ele-ments, as is common in high-density environments where those detection elements operate ( e.g. , in particle colliders). Back-ground noise, which a ff ect occupancy, induce ambiguities, and can lead to loss of resolution, often come from nuclear interac-tions, as well as from leakage current or other readout-related eff ects. While hardware design sets the information content we wish to access, through the definition of nominal hit resolution, gran-ularity, and number of expected hits per trajectory, the software tools operating on the produced data define how e ffi ciently that information is extracted, and ultimately determine the statisti-cal su ffi ciency of the dimensionality reduction they operate in transforming a very large, raw input dataset (which includes position, timing, and /or deposited charge of each recorded hit) into high-level output features (particle trajectories, electric charge, momentum, and sometimes particle type). A coupling between hardware and software in a particle tracker is therefore expected to arise through the subtle yet tight interplay that con-nects the two parts through the e ff ect of the confounding factors listed above. It is worth noting that, in an idealized situation—devoid of background noise, ine ffi ciencies, misalignments, and all the other mentioned ancillary physical phenomena a ff ecting the problem—the hardware specifications of a few layers of sili-con pixel detectors ( e.g. number of layers, vertical spacing and lateral dimensions) become e ff ectively decoupled from the spe-cific methods used to infer trajectories from the set of hits pro-duced by a single charged particle passing through the layers. In this situation, the problem becomes well-defined and falls back within the range of exact statistical inference; a likelihood func-tion can be formulated, co-design becomes unnecessary, and the optical solution is, in principle, unambiguous. We o ff er the following dumbed-down example to clarify the situation, pushing the abstraction to its extreme boundary.  

> Figure 4: Scheme of a simplified tracker made of 33 silicon strips (blue or green segments along y) organized into three layers (yellow) . The passage of a straight-going particle (red) may be recorded by the three green-coloured strips.

Suppose we want to measure with the highest possible preci-sion the vertical position y0 ∈ [0 , D] hit by a particle traveling approximately along x, for x = 0; here D is the width of a relevant region wherein we want to be sensitive. We may use for that task a detector comprising a fixed number M of silicon strips, each read out by one of M electronic channels. Strips are aligned along the direction orthogonal to the xy plane, and are arranged in a set of N layers set vertically along y (see Fig. 4) 13 and positioned at N locations in x ∈ [0 , L]. In this simplified setup we assume that hit positions are determined from single-strip hits (as would happen in the absence of magnetic fields, electric fields orthogonal to the strips, and nearly orthogonal crossing of particles on the layers), so that the vertical resolu-tion of each hit corresponds to the RMS of a uniform distribu-tion, and is simply 

σy = P/ √12 , (5) where P is the strip pitch. It is worth noting that, this simplified resolution estimate assumes that the distribution of measure-ment errors are Gaussian, while in reality we know they are better represented by a box distribution; we will come back to this detail infra . With a fixed number of strips, and the need to instrument the [0 , D] region in y, P is determined as 

P = (D/M) × N . (6) To estimate the vertical coordinate ˆ y where the particle beam is passing, we now imagine performing a straight line fit to the measured vertical coordinates yi of the set of N ≥ 2 points in 

x ∈ [0 , L], where horizontal uncertainties are assumed null and vertical uncertainties are all equal to σy as above. The max-imum likelihood estimate is uniformly minimum variance and unbiased for this linear Gaussian model. Ignoring constants, we write the negative log-likelihood as 

− log L(y0, m) = 12σ2

> yN

X

> i=1

(yi − y0 − mx i)2 , (7) where m is the slope of the trajectory in the xy plane. The solu-tion ˆ y0 follows by finding the extremum of − log L. The inverse of the Fisher information is 

I−1 = σ2

> y

N P x2 

> i

− (P xi)2

X

x2 

> i

−

X

xi

−

X

xi N

 , (8) from which the uncertainty on the ˆ y0 estimate can be obtained by using the Rao-Cramer-Frechet bound: Var(ˆ y0) = σ2

> y

1

N + ¯x2

S xx 

!

, S xx =

> N

X

> i=1

(xi − ¯x)2, ¯x = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

xi .

(9) By recalling the scaling form of σy (Eq. 5), we thus see that in this setup the uncertainty on the ˆ y0 estimate scales with the square root of the number of layers: we see it if, e.g. , we place “reasonably” the silicon layers in the [0 , L] interval ( i.e. , uni-formly), such that ¯ x = 1/2 and S xx = N/12: in that case Var(ˆ y0) = 4

N

D

√12 

NM

!2

= D2

3M2 N . (10) We thus discover that the optimal number of layers of such a device is N = 2: more layers would increase the position un-certainty in proportion to √N. Also, the optimal placement of these layers is no mystery - one has to be at x = 0, the other at 

x = L, so that S xx is maximised. In the simplified setup above, the optimal condition is work-able analytically and is uniquely determined, hence the problem trivially factorizes, and hardware choices ( i.e. , number of strip-s/electronic channels, connected to total cost) do not modify the software solution. Consider a slightly more complex situation where all simpli-fying elements of the above problem remain unchanged, except that the exact form of the vertical uncertainties is non analyti-cal, and can only be obtained through expensive simulations. A precise estimate of ˆ y would now require a non-analytical method to be extracted; it could be a simple one based on tem-plate histograms of hit residual distributions, or a more complex machine-learning-based one. Further assume that the number of electronic channels is not fixed, but must obey to a con-straint on the global cost of the experiment. The cost would not only include the sheer cost of hardware components, but also the CPU cost of simulations and inference procedures. In the same fixed-budget scenario of the previous version of this ex-ample, an optimization based on co-design would become un-avoidable, due to the introduced coupling: spending too much for the hardware would reduce the attainable precision of the simulated residual distributions, with a resulting impact on the quality of the inference on ˆ y.From the above examples, we conclude that it is the simulation-based, likelihood-free inference nature of the prob-lem of determining particle trajectories from noisy hits that necessitates the need for a simultaneous optimization of the hardware design and software methods used to extract the de-sired information. The underlying complexity, arising from the stochastic nature of the physical processes at the core of the problem, precludes the analytical inference. Such a situation is common to many of the problems in the rest of this section and in Sec. 4. Whenever the data-generation process admits a closed-form likelihood and the associated inference problem is analytically solvable, the dependence of statistical performance on detector design can be expressed explicitly ( e.g. , via Fisher information), enabling a factorized optimization of hardware and inference. In contrast, when inference relies on simulations or approximate models, this explicit mapping is lost, and hard-ware and software become intrinsically coupled through com-putational and modeling constraints. 

3.1.2. Persistent co-design dimensions in tracking 

The end-to-end optimization of a particle tracker is a highly demanding task, and a worked-out example where quantitative assessments of the sub-optimality ratio defined in Sec. 1 could be made lays beyond the scope of this work. Here we limit ourselves to consider six di ff erent situations where a co-design dimension arises in tracking detectors, and discuss their gener-alities. 1. MuOnE detector This is one example where clear co-design elements were demonstrated quantitatively for a full system. The MuOnE detector is a silicon-strip particle tracker designed for the purpose of measuring with high accuracy the di ff erential distribution of muon-electron scattering at high energy, with special focus in the high-q2

14 kinematic region (76). The three particles to be tracked in scattering events (incoming and outgoing muon, and out-going electron) travel nearly parallel to the beam axis z, but the all-important precision of the q2 determination rests on a precise (micrometric) knowledge of the positioning of the silicon strip layers along z. A determination of the layers positions zi and tilt angles θi from survey measure-ments is trumped by a data-driven measurement, where real scattering events can be fit with in turn each zi or θi be left out as a free parameter, obtaining 1 .5μm precision on the layer z position from 10 million reconstructed events (which can be collected in a few minutes of run time in the considered experimental conditions). An optimization of the geometry of the detector layout (relative positioning of sensors and targets) gets therefore coupled to the software extraction of the position uncertainties. For more detail see Ref. (77). 

> Figure 5: Layout of one of 40 1m-long stations composing the MuOnE detector as envisioned by the MuOnE Collaboration (76). Muons (of 150 GeV momen-tum) enter from the left, impinge on a beryllium target of 1.5 cm thickness, and the resulting scattered particles are then tracked by a set of double-sided silicon strip tracking layers.

A further coupling of hardware and software in the MuOnE example comes from the reconstruction of the three particle trajectories, and it is instructive for its demonstration of how consideration of the whole prob-lem leads to possible drastic improvements in the design. Since most of the scattering interactions occur within a thick beryllium target 4, there is very little or no advan-tage in q2 resolution from the simultaneous fitting of the three particles to a common three-dimensional vertex, as the driving uncertainty propagates to q2 from the z posi-tion of the vertex while the vertex-constrained fit can only improve the x, y residuals (again, due to the trajectories being almost parallel to the beam axis). One might then be tempted to adopt a reconstruction scheme where each particle is treated separately; an advantage of this modus operandi would come from reducing potential smearing eff ects to the kinematics from multiple scattering in the target. This was indeed what the collaboration did in their early performance studies. However, the realization that a strong dependence of the precision of q2 estimate on the precision of z location of the vertex is only present if a vertex-constrained reconstruction is adopted may lead researchers to change the hardware design to exploit the fact: a z-segmented target, made of e.g. thin carbon-fiber  

> 4Other small-Zmaterials could be similarly envisioned for the target mate-rial.

sheets (50 μm or below) spaced in air, or even better in vac-uum, generates a strong reduction of the z-position uncer-tainty, and consequently on the q2 resolution particularly in the high-q2 region of specific focus of the experiment (see Fig. 6). Here, the key aspect of co-design is the pre-cise impedance matching of the spacing to the precision of the vertex-constrained fit as guaranteed by the silicon hits. This creates a strong coupling of chosen geometry and ver-tex segmentation detail. Again, the interested reader is re-ferred to Ref. (77) for more detail.    

> Figure 6: Progressive improvement of the resolution in muon-electron scatter-ing q2as a function of q2, obtained by the staged optimization discussed in Ref. (77).

2. Sensor positions and mechanical tolerances The themes considered above for the placement of silicon sensors in the MuOnE detector are common of all charged particle trackers, so it is useful to generalize their discussion here. Sensor resolution is one of the hardware factors driving the performance of a tracker, but its impact is modulated by the precision of positioning and alignment of the sensors. Depending on the specific goals of a detector, silicon strips or pixels may be chosen to detect the passage of particles; in general, the higher precision on the z

coordinate (usually the one along which strips are aligned) provided by the latter guarantees higher precision to the overall reconstruction task, but this may be not crucial when an axial magnetic field guarantees that transversal hit positions in the xy plane dominate the precision on particle momenta. The much larger number of electronic channels required by pixel sensors induces the need of a compromise when global cost is a tight constraint. Afurther element materializing a non-trivial optimization frontier arises when mechanical stability couples with global fit strategies for sensors positioning determination: mechanical cost and calibration e ff ort both play in the global resources budget. Again mentioning the MuOnE example, a determination of the position of silicon layers to within a few micrometers was demonstrated with the use of a complex (and expensive) holographic laser sys-tem; even in the absence of the data-driven determination discussed above, the resources required for that special 15 system determine a Pareto boundary – although in this case between hardware-only parameters. 3. Material budget and interaction length A further struc-tural co-design dimension in tracking detectors is the amount and distribution of passive materials inside the tracking volume, usually parameterized in units of radi-ation length X0 (governing electromagnetic interactions such as bremsstrahlung and photon conversion) and nu-clear interaction length λI (78) (governing hadronic inter-actions). Modern silicon trackers for general-purpose col-lider experiments typically accumulate of order one radia-tion length and a sizeable fraction of an interaction length along the path from the interaction point to the electromag-netic calorimeter in at least part of their pseudorapidity 5

coverage, with a large fraction of the material coming from services (79), cooling, supports and front-end electronics rather than the sensors themselves. Detailed R&D for HL-LHC upgrades, for instance, has pushed inner trackers to-wards targets of O(0 .1 X0) per layer 6 in the central re-gion (80), but even in those designs the integrated thick-ness to the calorimeter remains a non-negligible fraction of X0 and λI .From a physics point of view, the material budget cou-ples directly to several distinct performance drivers: mul-tiple Coulomb scattering, longitudinal and transverse en-ergy loss for electrons, photon conversion probability, and the rate of nuclear interactions of hadrons. For low- and intermediate-momentum tracks, multiple scattering rather than single-hit resolution often dominates the curvature and impact-parameter resolutions; the characteristic scat-tering angle scales as (81): 

θ0 ≃ 13 .6 MeV 

βp

r xX0

"

1 + 0.038 ln xX0

!# 

, (11) so that each additional layer, cooling pipe, or support tra-versed by the track alters the balance between measure-ment noise and process noise in the track fit. Whether it is preferable, for a fixed material budget, to distribute that material in a larger number of thin layers or a smaller number of thicker layers depends on the track model em-ployed by the reconstruction ( e.g. , simple Kalman filter versus more sophisticated treatments (82) of multiple scat-tering, adaptive outlier rejection, or trajectory smoothing) and on the seeding and pattern-recognition strategy. The same hardware configuration can thus yield markedly dif-ferent e ff ective resolutions and e ffi ciencies depending on the software choices, and the hardware optimum in terms of x/X0 and λI cannot be determined in isolation from them. Nuclear interactions in the tracker material represent an-other important dimension of coupling. When a charged           

> 5Pseudorapidity ηis a function of the angle θof final state particles with the initial beam direction, η=−log tan θ
> 2.
> 6This is based on expected tracking and related performance with the up-dated ATLAS Inner Tracker layout at the High-Luminosity LHC (2021).

hadron undergoes a hadronic interaction within the track-ing volume, its original track may terminate or kink, and a spray of secondaries is produced. These secon-daries can seed fake tracks, create secondary vertices that mimic heavy-flavour decays, and degrade jet and missing-transverse-momentum reconstruction. At the same time, exactly the same interactions can be exploited by dedi-cated reconstruction to map the distribution of tracker ma-terial in-situ , and to validate or tune the detector simula-tion (79). The design decision to tolerate (or not) a certain integrated λI in front of the calorimeters therefore depends on how powerful and robust the downstream algorithms for nuclear-interaction tagging, vertex reconstruction, and material mapping are expected to be. A detector with more material but a reconstruction chain that can e ffi ciently tag and veto nuclear interactions might outperform, for some physics goals, a lighter detector operated with a simpler reconstruction. This interplay becomes even sharper when the tracking system is required to provide additional functionality such as real-time track-based triggering. For example, mod-ern outer trackers designed with “transverse momentum modules ( pT -modules)" (80) performing on-detector stub finding and coarse transverse-momentum selection neces-sarily incorporate extra silicon, electronics and services within the tracking volume. That additional material de-grades o ffl ine tracking, electron and photon reconstruc-tion, and calorimeter performance, but it enables sophis-ticated Level-1 trigger algorithms that would be impossi-ble without on-detector preprocessing. The net utility of such a design cannot be written as a monotonic function of the material budget alone: it depends in a strongly non-factorizable way on the firmware and software stack that exploits the real-time information. Hardware choices that look suboptimal in a purely o ffl ine tracking metric may be preferred once trigger performance and bandwidth con-straints are folded in. Thus, the material budget and interaction length are per-sistent co-design dimensions because the same hardware parameter x/X0 (and λI ) simultaneously controls multiple, qualitatively di ff erent reconstruction challenges, which are addressed with di ff erent classes of algorithms. The lo-cation and amount of material cannot be optimized in-dependently from assumptions about pattern recognition, track fitting, nuclear-interaction and conversion recon-struction, and even triggering; conversely, algorithm de-sign is constrained by the material profile inherited from hardware. The corresponding utility is therefore inher-ently non-decomposable in the sense discussed in Sec. 1. The complex, bidirectional hardware-software dependen-cies are shown schematically in Fig. 7. 4. Electron reconstruction and tracker-calorimeter inter-play 

Electrons exemplify in a particularly acute form the non-decomposable coupling between tracking and calorime-try. As they traverse the tracker material, electrons ra-diate bremsstrahlung photons with a probability that in-16 Figure 7: Schematic illustration of the material budget as a co-design axis in tracking detectors. The diagram shows the bidirectional, non-factorizable coupling between hardware and software. The detector geometry and material distribution ( x/X0, λI ) constrain the design space of pattern recognition, track fitting, and high-level reconstruction algorithms. These algorithms, in turn, determine the final tracking performance metrics (e ffi ciency, resolution, fake rate), which inform iterative hardware optimization. The cycle highlights that the same material configuration can yield di ff erent physics outcomes depend-ing on the algorithmic choices, and conversely, that algorithm development is constrained by the inherited material profile. 

creases with x/X0 and with their energy; in an LHC-like detector an electron of tens of GeV typically crosses a substantial fraction of a radiation length before reaching the electromagnetic calorimeter, and may therefore lose a large and highly fluctuating fraction of its energy in the tracker volume. The resulting momentum-loss distribu-tion is strongly non-Gaussian (83), with a long tail of hard emissions, and the associated photons can themselves con-vert in the tracker material. This induces abrupt changes in track curvature, large E/p tails, and extended energy de-posits in the calorimeter along the bending direction of the magnetic field. Modern general-purpose detectors respond to this situation by reconstructing electrons through an explicitly joint use of tracker and calorimeter information. On the calorime-ter side, algorithms group multiple neighbouring cells or crystals into “superclusters” whose shape is tuned to the expected pattern of bremsstrahlung in the magnetic field and to the segmentation of the calorimeter. In CMS, for instance, elongated superclusters in ϕ are built around a high-energy seed crystal (84) to collect radiated photons that have been swept sideways in the 3.8 T solenoidal field, with the parametrization of the clustering window depending on pseudorapidity, energy, and local material distribution in front of the ECAL. The optimal granular-ity and longitudinal segmentation of the electromagnetic calorimeter, and even the choice of absorber and scintil-lator material (which fix X0 and the Molière radius), are therefore co-determined with the clustering and energy-regression algorithms that will exploit the shower shapes (Fig.8). A calorimeter design that is “best” under a sim-plistic assumption of compact, un-radiated showers may cease to be optimal once realistic bremsstrahlung and con-version patterns, and the corresponding reconstruction, are taken into account. On the tracking side, the same bremsstrahlung complicates the track model. Standard Kalman filtering, which as-sumes approximately Gaussian process noise, is subopti-mal (85) for electrons because the occasional large energy losses and kinks are poorly described by a single Gaus-sian term. Gaussian-sum filter (GSF) algorithms address this (83) by representing the electron state as a weighted sum of hypotheses with di ff erent momenta, e ff ectively modelling the bremsstrahlung loss distribution as a Gaus-sian mixture. This improves the momentum resolution and, crucially, the reliability of the estimated uncertainties, but at the price of substantially increased computational cost and algorithmic complexity. The benefit of deploying a GSF (and the amount of complexity that can profitably be invested in it) depends sensitively on the actual amount and localization of material in the tracker, as well as on the magnetic field strength and layer radii. A hardware de-sign that concentrates most of the material in a few well-defined layers may make the bremsstrahlung pattern easier for a GSF to capture than a design with the same integrated 

x/X0 but a complicated, service-dominated distribution. Conversely, the availability of a powerful electron-specific track model may relax otherwise stringent constraints on the detailed homogeneity of the tracker material. The final electron momentum (or energy) estimate typi-cally results from a non-trivial combination of tracking and calorimeter measurements. At low and intermediate momenta the track curvature can dominate the resolution, while at higher energies the calorimeter measurement is superior; in the presence of substantial bremsstrahlung, however, even at moderate energies the calorimeter of-ten provides a more stable estimator of the electron en-ergy, and the track serves primarily to determine the di-rection and charge. State-of-the-art reconstruction chains therefore employ multivariate regressions that take as in-put track parameters (84), the pattern of bremsstrahlung along the track, supercluster shapes, and local material in-dicators, and return an optimally weighted estimate of the electron kinematics. The performance of such regressions depends both on hardware (which fixes the feature space: segmentation, depth, noise, material profile) and on soft-ware (which fixes the class of functions that can be repre-sented and learned), and the utility of changes in one space cannot be assessed without modelling the other. 17 Figure 8: Hardware–software co-design in electron reconstruction. Tracker material and ECAL granularity (hardware) determine bremsstrahlung patterns and shower shapes, which in turn drive algorithmic choices: GSF for tracking, superclusters for calorimetry, and multivariate regression for combined estima-tion. Performance feedback closes the loop, underscoring the non-separable nature of the optimization problem. 

Because electrons are key objects for precision measure-ments ( e.g. , of the W mass, electroweak mixing angle, and various di ff erential cross sections) (86) and for many searches, the electron energy and angle resolutions, tails, and identification e ffi ciencies often set the sensitivity floor of an experiment. Small modifications of the tracker mate-rial in front of the calorimeter, or of the ECAL granularity or longitudinal segmentation, can therefore have dispro-portionate impact on physics reach once they are propa-gated through realistic electron reconstruction and calibra-tion. In design and upgrade studies, it is precisely this strongly coupled electron channel that frequently drives the choice among alternative layouts for supports, ser-vices, and calorimeter modules. As a result, electron re-construction and the tracker–calorimeter system that en-ables it, form a persistent co-design dimension: hardware and software choices influence each other through gen-uinely non-linear and non-factorizable dependencies, and meaningful optimization requires treating them together rather than in a hardware-first, software-second sequence. 5. 4D track seeding vs. pile-up occupancy In the HL-LHC environment, with up to O(200) proton–proton interac-tions per bunch crossing and a vertex time spread of order 

σPU ∼ 180 ps (87), track seeding in the innermost tracker layers is challenged by combinatorial background arising from hits produced by pile-ups, i.e. ., simultaneous colli-sions overlaid on top of the interaction of interest. Preci-sion timing layers such as the CMS MIP Timing Detec-tor (MTD) and the ATLAS High-Granularity Timing De-tector (HGTD), which target at track-time resolutions of 

σt ≃ 30–50 ps (88, 89), introduce an additional handle in the time dimension: hits can be filtered using a temporal gate of width ∆t around a predicted track or vertex time. This e ff ectively reduces the instantaneous occupancy seen by the seeding and track-building algorithms, at the price of potentially discarding in-time hits when the gate is too narrow. A simple scaling argument illustrates the trade-o ff . Con-sider a region of interest in ( η, ϕ ) on a given layer where, without timing, the average number of hits per bunch crossing is λ0. If the hit times are approximately uni-form over a relevant time span Teff (set by the luminous region and readout response), restricting to a time window 

∆t reduces the mean hit multiplicity to λ(∆t) ≃ λ0 ∆t/Teff .For seeds built from k layers with similar occupancies, the number of hit combinations to be tested scales roughly as 

Nseed (∆t) ∝ λ(∆t)k ∝ ∆t k.

In a CKF-style combinatorial track finding, branchings at each layer also depend on the number of compatible hits (88), so the total CPU time or latency for track build-ing grows rapidly with ∆t. Narrowing the timing gate can therefore reduce seeding and building time by orders of magnitudes in dense events. On the other hand, the seeding e ffi ciency for true tracks falls if the gate is too tight compared to the timing resolu-tion. For a track originating at time t0, the measured time of a hit on the timing layer can be modeled as 

thit = t0 + δt, δt ∼ N (0 , σ 2eff ),

where σeff collects intrinsic sensor resolution σt and addi-tional contributions from time-of-flight modeling, calibra-tion, and vertex-time uncertainty. If a hit is accepted only when |thit −t0| < ∆t/2, the single-hit acceptance probability is 

phit (∆t, σ eff ) = erf ∆t

2 √2 σeff 

!

.

For a seed requiring k such hits to survive the time gate, a crude approximation to the seeding e ffi ciency is ϵseed ≃

pk

> hit

. Achieving, say, ϵseed ≳ 95% for triplet seeds typ-ically implies ∆t ∼ (5–6) σeff (see Fig. 9): for a per-hit resolution of 30 ps this corresponds to ∆t of order 150– 200 ps, while for 50 ps timing it requires ∆t ∼ 250– 300 ps. Thus, the optimal time gate is set not by the pile-up timescale ( ∼ 200 ps) alone, but by the ratio ∆t/σ eff ;improving the hardware timing resolution allows a propor-tional reduction of ∆t at fixed e ffi ciency (90), which trans-lates into a superlinear reduction of combinatorics because 

Nseed ∝ ∆t k.This establishes 4D seeding as a genuine co-design prob-lem. On the hardware side, the choice of timing technol-ogy, number and location of timing layers, achievable σt

under irradiation, and digitization granularity determine 

σeff and the stability of time measurements over the de-tector lifetime. On the software side, the tracking pipeline must decide how aggressively to exploit time in seed-ing and CKF gates: whether to apply a single global ∆t,to use layer- or region-dependent windows, or to prop-agate a full 4D state (including time and its covariance) through a time-aware Kalman filter (89) that predicts the expected hit time at each layer and adapts the gate ac-cordingly. More sophisticated time modeling enables nar-rower, track-dependent gates and hence larger combina-torial gains, but at the cost of higher per-candidate CPU and more complex calibration; conversely, simplistic use 18 Figure 9: (a) Ratio of seed combinations as a function of the timing gate width ∆t for triplet seeds (k =3), relative to the untimed case. (b) Corresponding seeding effi ciency for four values of the detector timing resolution σt. Solid circles indicate the minimum ∆t satisfying ϵseed ≥ 95% in each case; the dashed vertical marks the pile-up time spread σPU 200 ps. The shaded band highlights the co-design operating region where improvements in hardware timing resolution translate into a superlinear reduction of combinatorics only when the algorithmic gate is adapted accordingly. 

of timing ( e.g. a loose fixed window) leaves much of the potential combinatorial reduction on the table, mak-ing investments in better σt less valuable. In this sce-nario the utility depends on cross-terms between hardware and software parameters. For example, a tracker with 

σt ≃ 30 ps operated with conservative ∆t comparable to the pile-up spread may see little improvement in seeding time over a 50 ps design, whereas an algorithm that dy-namically sets ∆t ≈ c σeff for each seed (with c tuned to the physics requirements) can translate a factor ∼ 1.5 im-provement in timing resolution into a factor ∼ 3–5 reduc-tion in the number of seed combinations at fixed e ffi ciency. Similarly, the design of hardware triggers or streaming-reconstruction farms sets an upper bound on acceptable track-finding latency; whether that bound is met depends jointly on the timing performance of the detectors and on how aggressively 4D information is exploited in seeding and fitting. As a result, optimal choices of σt, timing-layer layout, and seeding strategy cannot be obtained by sep-arating hardware-first and software-second optimizations: they must be treated as a coupled 4D design space (90). 6. Converted photons in the Higgs search In the search for the Higgs boson decay to photon pairs performed by CMS and ATLAS for their 2012 discovery, the mass resolution played a pivotal role, as higher mass resolution directly translates in a higher significance of the small collectable signal. Mass resolution is dominated by how well each photons energy and direction are measured. The CMS de-tector has superb energy resolution, so angular resolution becomes a key limiter for the di-photon mass. As photons do not leave a track in the particle tracker, the identifica-tion of their direction is a tricky issue in high-luminosity conditions where multiple proton-proton interactions take place within the same event; it must leverage information from the primary vertex activity. However, converted pho-tons, producing a electron-positron pair detectable in the inner tracker, have a degraded ECAL energy containment, but a precisely reconstructed direction—because the con-version vertex and the electrons trajectories provide strong geometric constraints. CMS exploited this by combining ECAL clusters with tracker-based conversion fits, improv-ing the di-photon mass resolution for events with conver-sions. As the tracker material budget increases, the photon conversion probability also rises, leading to a trade-o ff in design between material budget and the number of con-version events in Higgs study. However, the same ma-terial causes increased multiple scattering, which a ff ects track parameter resolution; it adds bremsstrahlung, with a degraded electron momentum measurement; and adds secondary interactions, occupancy, and fake rate. This highlights the existence of an optimization frontier be-tween conversion statistics and tracking quality. The CMS tracker has about 0.4 to 1.0 radiation lengths of material in the barrel, and up to 1 .8X0 in the endcaps. This makes the 19 conversion probability as high as 40 to 60 percent. Events containing the resulting conversions did constitute a sig-nificant portion of the Higgs candidate signal. However, the benefits from the special characteristics of these events did not outweigh the global disadvantages of tracker ma-terial. The CMS Collaboration notes that reducing tracker material would improve the overall photon energy and res-olution more than the gain resulting from conversions (91). Indeed, subsequent CMS upgrade e ff orts for the Phase-1 and Phase-2 of the experiment prioritized material reduc-tion, even though that reduced the conversions yield. This example thus highlights how a relevant question that had to be considered at design stage, once a careful appraisal of the relative importance of the observation of a Higgs signal with the diphoton decay mode were made with re-spect to the other scientific goals of the experiment, was the balancing of negative and positive e ff ects of a signifi-cant amount of tracker material. 

3.1.3. Emerging directions 

The above examples spotlight a few common strategies in the design of tracking detectors, which may inspire synergies with design tasks in e.g., medical imaging or muon tomography ap-plications (see also Sec. 3.11). One of these is the advantage arising from data-driven alignment loops which may exploit the collected data to monitor the position of the sensing elements of a system. If the improvement in position resolution that such systems may o ff er at run time is disregarded during the design of a detector, this may lead to an incorrect assessment of its overall performance, with a resulting impedance mismatch of hardware- and software-driven resolutions. Another strategy that may have common use is the potential extraction of cru-cial extra information from physical e ff ects that increase com-plexity rather than simplify the original task: that is the case of nuclear interactions in the detector material, which could in principle be exploited to help in particle identification, and of bremsstrahlung radiation, which is known to significantly im-prove the precision of electron trajectories and their energy and momentum measurement if the tracker is coupled to a granular electromagnetic calorimeter, in the presence of a strong mag-netic field. Further, the mentioned exploitation of photon con-versions in H → γγ searches by CMS highlights how recon-struction ingenuity can extract information from detector im-perfections, but they do not always justify those imperfections. Co-design aims to minimize such trade-o ff s by aligning hard-ware transparency with software sophistication. 

3.2. Calorimeters 

Designing calorimeters for energy measurement and particle identification requires balancing su ffi cient absorber material, 

e.g. , iron, lead, or tungsten, to fully contain a particle shower with adequate sensitive volumes, e.g. , scintillating plastics or crystals, to infer the relevant physical properties from the re-sulting signals. The most straightforward solution is a homo-geneous calorimeter, constructed either from a compact block of expensive scintillating material with a short radiation length (e.g. , PbWO 4) or from a much larger volume of inexpensive scintillator with a longer radiation length ( e.g. , polystyrene). In practice, both approaches quickly encounter geometric con-straints that limit detector size or cost constraints that restrict the feasible detector volume. Sampling calorimeters address these limitations by alternat-ing absorber layers with sensitive material, allowing e ffi cient shower containment while remaining compatible with geomet-ric and cost constraints. However, this introduces additional design parameters, such as the choice of materials and layer thicknesses, significantly increasing the complexity of detec-tor optimization. Exhaustively exploring this parameter space through full detector simulations and reconstruction studies is computationally prohibitive (92), motivating the use of more sophisticated optimization strategies. 

3.2.1. Methods 

In the following sections, we describe and showcase the co-design of a sampling calorimeter utilizing local generative sur-rogates (Sec. 3.2.2), Bayesian optimization (Sec. 3.2.3), and mutual information surrogates (Sec. 3.2.4). 

Geometry. We parameterize a simplified sampling calorimeter geometry, similar to the one described in Ref. (47), consisting of five layers, each with a passive absorber and an active scin-tillator component. The absorber materials function as a cost-eff ective material with short radiation length to ensure shower containment, while the scintillators enable an electronic read-out of the high-energy particles induced by emittance of optical photons. Both the absorbers and scintillators are constructed as rectangular cuboids with 50 cm side length and variable depth, stacked along the beam axis. Each scintillator layer is seg-mented into 25 cells in each direction, giving each cell an area of 2 × 2 cm 2, a typical value used in experiments. Parameters tA,i and tS ,i describe absorber and scintillator thickness at layer i, respectively. Further, the material of each layer is parameterized as mA,i and mS ,i. The selection of ab-sorber material is restricted to iron (Fe) and lead (Pb), while the scintillator can be constructed out of lead tungstate (PbWO 4) or polystyrene ((C 8H8)n). The list of all design variables and their respective possible choices are summarized in Tab. 1. 

> Table 1: Design variables for the calorimeter co-design optimization problem, including layer thicknesses and material selections.

Param Value Range Description [tA,i] R+ Absorber thickness [tS ,i] R+ Scintillator thickness [mA,i] {Fe , Pb } Absorber material [mS ,i] {PbWO 4, (C 8H8)n} Scintillator material We subsequently define the full mixed discrete-continuous hardware design space of the calorimeter as the Cartesian prod-uct of the individual design variables 

h ∈ H , where H B

Y

> i

Hi, and 

Hi B R+ × R+ × { Fe , Pb } × { PbWO 4, (C 8H8)n} .

(12) 20 Here Hi and H denote the admissible design domain of layer 

i and the full calorimeter, respectively. 

Simulation. The simulations are performed through G eant 4. Each event consists of a single particle ( γ or e+) with energy uniformly sampled between 5 and 100 GeV. The incident posi-tion of the particle is sampled around the center of the calorime-ter such that the entire shower is recorded. The cells deposited energy, their center position, and their size are used in the re-construction. 

Reconstruction. We target a calorimeter layout that excels both in terms of particle identification and energy resolution. To es-timate the particle type and its energy, we utilize independent neural networks for energy prediction and particle identifica-tion, which constitute the software parameterization of our co-design problem. We therefore define the software design space as 

s ∈ S , S B Θreg × Θclass , (13) where Θreg and Θclass are the admissible regression and clas-sification parameter spaces, respectively. For the purposes of this case study, we limit the complexity of the optimization task by considering fixed architectures, even though auto-ML and architectural search describe the possibility of incorporat-ing the search for optimal architectures into the co-design pro-cess (93, 94). Below we provide a comprehensive description of the architectures for both tasks. 1. Energy regression To predict the initial particle energy, we utilize an energy regression network similar to the one described in Ref. (47). The regression network is a feed-forward network composed of three layers of 100 neu-rons ϕreg : R|θ|+|h| → R that takes the concatenated vector of detector parameters and shower features. The shower features contain the log-scaled total energy deposited per layer, the z-position of the layer, and the cell dimensions in the three directions. Both detector parameters and shower features are standardized to stabilize the training, and the target is the true particle energy. Given a dataset of simu-lations for various detector geometries in a local neighbor-hood, the network is optimized by minimizing 

LReg = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

(Erec − Etrue )2

Etrue + 1

!

. (14) The loss is a scaled mean squared error (MSE) loss, where the scaling factor 1 /(Etrue + 1) regulates the importance of events with higher initial energy (47). 2. Particle classification To take advantage of the transverse shower shape, a convolutional neural network (CNN) is used to treat the deposited energy per cell as an image (95). The longitudinal shape of the shower is therefore the only direction that the optimization can a ff ect. The optimiza-tion could be extended to include the transverse shape by allowing the granularity as an optimizable parameter; however, in that case the CNN is not suitable anymore, and graph neural networks should be used instead. We leave that to future work. Each calorimeter layer image is processed by a dedicated CNN, whose output is then concatenated and passed to a small feed-forward network of two layers of 32 neu-rons. In addition, layer contextual information, such as total layer deposited energy, layer position and cell size, and detector parameters are preprocessed by another small feed-forward network with two layers of 64 and 32 neu-rons to be added to the CNN encodings. The CNN setup was chosen to allow di ff erent granular-ity in each layer, though for this study it is fixed to the same value. Each CNN consists of three blocks of two convolution operations preceded by GroupNorm (96) nor-malization layers, with residual connections between each block. The first two blocks have kernel sizes of (3,3) with the second one using a dilation parameter of 2, and the last one has a kernel size of (5,5), all using padding such that the image size does not change and each also expands the number of channels by a factor of 2. This architecture was chosen to allow the extraction of higher-level infor-mation as the image goes through the blocks. At the end of each CNN, both mean and max pooling are applied to the processed image in a 5 × 5 grid that is then flattened and concatenated to be fed to the feed-forward network. A dropout rate of 0.3 is applied to all layers to mitigate overfitting, and early stopping is used. The energy deposited per cell in each layer serves as the image fed to the di ff erent CNNs. Several preprocessing steps are performed to mitigate the wide range of values in each shower. First, the image is centered and normalized to avoid any bias from the position and total deposited en-ergy. To mitigate the e ff ect of high-energy tails, the fourth root is used on the image pixels, which are then standard-ized. A second channel is included as a binary mask to encode the information that some cells are empty or not. The classification network ϕclass : R|θ|+l×(|g|×| g|+|c|) → R ob-jective is a binary classification over the particle type ( γ

versus e+), with classical cross-entropy loss 

LClass = − 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

yi log(ˆ yi) + (1 − yi) log(1 − ˆyi) , (15) where we define the binary label y ∈ { 0, 1} such that y = 1corresponds to the particle being an e+ and y = 0 corre-sponds to the particle being a γ.

Optimization target. To obtain an optimized calorimeter lay-out, we perform a joint optimization of software and hardware parameters to maximize both energy resolution and e+, γ classi-fication performance subject to additional geometry constraints. We write the joint optimization as a multi-objective optimiza-tion problem with additional constraints as arg min 

> θ∈H×S

f (θ) = (LClass (θ), LReg (θ)) s.t. C(h) ≤ 100 , 000 EUR 

T (h) ≤ 100 cm ,

(16) 21 where LClass and LReg are the validation losses of en-ergy reconstruction and particle classification networks out-lined in Eq. 14 and Eq. 15. Further, C(h) and T (h) are geome-try constraints, limiting both the total thickness and cost of the calorimeter to ensure practical feasibility of the design. Both constraint functions T (h) and C(h) are defined as 

T (h) =

> 5

X

> i=1

tA,i + tS ,i and 

C(h) =

> 5

X

> i=1

c(mA,i)tA,i + c(mS ,i)tS ,i ,

(17) respectively. For the cost function c(m), we use EU-R/cm costs for absorber and scintillator materials presented in Ref. (47).             

> (a) AIDO optimization scheme
> (b) BO optimization scheme
> Figure 10: Optimization schemes for both AIDO and BO methods. Θrep-resents the set of optimizable detector parameters, Eand Care the true tar-gets for particle energy and type, Ereco and Creco their reconstructed quantities. While AIDO (top) uses a generative surrogate model—trained to emulate the reconstruction—from which a gradient can be obtained to optimize Θ, BO (bot-tom) uses a Bayesian surrogate to map the loss space as a function of Θ.

3.2.2. End-to-end Optimization with AIDO 

Given the parameterized sampling calorimeter geometry in-troduced in Sec. 3.2.1, the detector design can be described by a set of parameters θ, including absorber and scintillator layer thicknesses as well as material choices. In principle, one could directly optimize the detector design by minimizing a physics performance metric L(θ), but performing a full detector sim-ulation for every parameter update quickly becomes computa-tionally prohibitive when exploring the large design space of sampling calorimeters. To address this challenge, the AI Detector Optimization 

(AIDO) framework introduces a di ff erentiable surrogate model acting as a digital twin of the simulation–reconstruction chain. Instead of directly optimizing the expensive function L(θ), AIDO learns an approximation S(θ) ≈ L (θ) from a dataset of simulated detector configurations. Once trained, this surrogate predicts detector performance for new parameter values at neg-ligible computational cost and provides gradients that can be used by the optimizer. The optimization proceeds through an iterative Simulation– Reconstruction–Surrogate–Optimizer (SRSO) loop, as shown in Fig. 10a. Starting from an initial configuration θ0, a set of nearby detector configurations is sampled from a multivariate normal distribution θi ∼ N (θ, Kθ), where Kθ denotes the co-variance matrix controlling the sampling scale in the detector parameter space. Each sampled configuration is evaluated us-ing the full simulation and reconstruction pipeline to obtain the corresponding performance metric Li. The resulting dataset 

{(θi, Li)} is then used to train the surrogate model. After train-ing, the surrogate is used to update the detector parameters us-ing a gradient-based optimizer, 

θn+1 = θn − η∇θS(θn),

where η denotes the learning rate. Additional constraints, such as detector size, material cost, or engineering limits, can be incorporated into the optimization objective through penalty terms in the loss function. An important feature of this framework is its ability to treat mixed continuous and discrete detector parameters. Contin-uous parameters such as layer thicknesses are optimized di-rectly, while categorical parameters such as material choices are represented by probability distributions over possible cate-gories. The optimizer updates the corresponding logits, which are mapped to probabilities through a softmax transformation, enabling gradient-based optimization even in the presence of discrete design choices. Specifically, the optimizer loss is expressed as a trade-o ff be-tween regression and classification losses Lopt = Lreg +λ Lclass ,a technique called linear scalarization. Setting di ff erent values of λ can be used to explore the Pareto front. In this section, however, lambda is initially set to zero, such that only the re-gression is optimized, then annealed to one so the optimizer gradually orients to another regression loss space minimum that corresponds to a classification loss space minimum. The sig-moid annealing is chosen to provide a smooth transition, with-out which the optimizer can lose the already established im-provement on the regression task. The starting configuration 22 for the calorimeter is chosen as a very suboptimal one, with 5 layers of absorber with 10 cm depth, each followed by a scin-tillator layer of 3 cm depth. Both absorbers and scintillators are initialized with 50% probability in each material to provide a neutral starting point.   

> Figure 11: Evolution of the optimization using AIDO for both regression and classification as a function of the iteration number. First panel: longitudinal composition of the calorimeter. Second panel: evolution of the di ff erent losses with spread of the di ff erent sampled detector parameters in the shaded area, and among them the optimizer parameter set from the previous iteration in the dot-ted line. Third panel: annealing parameter dictating the trade-o ff between re-gression and classification performance. Fourth panel: regression performance as the energy resolution. Fifth panel: classification performance as the Receiver Output Characteristic Area Under the Curve (AUC) score.

This evolved experiment is illustrated in Fig. 11. The first phase depicts that when λ = 0, the regression loss decreases as expected, whereas the classification performance degrades and the spread of sampled parameters loss values collapses. It shows both regression and classification as two clear directions. In this phase, the classifier converges first to the dense scintil-lator layer to catch most of the shower, after collapsing other layers to zero length. In the second phase during the anneal-ing of λ, the optimizer loss increases as the classification loss values get included but no improvement is observed as there is no proper direction in the classification loss space from the sampled parameters. After overcoming this, in the third phase 

> (a) Regression loss space
> (b) Classification loss space
> Figure 12: Loss space for regression (top) and classification (bottom) as a func-tion of two particular parameters: the first and second scintillator layer lengths. The dots represent the mean loss values for each set of detector parameters, and the crosses represent the state of the optimizer as a function of the algorithm iterations.

when λ = 1, the classification loss decreases while the regres-sion loss remains at stable minimal value, which shows that the regression loss has reached a new local equivalent minimum. Due to the expansion of the previously collapsed layers, the calorimeter gets access to the longitudinal shape of the shower. Specifically, the first layer provides crucial data as e+ particles produce an immediate shower, whereas γ particles start their shower upon the first interaction through pair production later in the calorimeter. These three phases can be observed in the parameter space of Fig. 12. Initially, the optimizer favours a deep first scintillator layer to catch most of the shower and provide good energy res-olution. This local regression loss minimum however coincides with a classification loss maximum, as this first deep layer pre-vents access to the information about the shower starting depth. After annealing, the optimizer moves to another point where both losses have a local minimum, and the first scintillator is reduced to a very small depth. The study of the e ff ect of the trade-o ff parameter λ between the regression and classification losses and the visualization of its Pareto front is in Fig. 13. For small values of λ where the regression objective is emphasized, AIDO will tend to place dense and thick scintillator layers early on to catch most of the shower, which are expensive, and therefore has to rely on larger absorber layers and thinner scintillator layers at the end of the shower. This situation is reversed for large values of λ where the classification objective is emphasized and the calorimeter 23 has cheaper and thicker scintillator layers to obtain meaningful longitudinal shower profiles, at the expense of potentially losing the tail of the shower, which impacts the energy estimation. In all cases, however, each detector retains a thin first scintillator layer that is beneficial to detect the early e+ showers.   

> (a) Pareto loss space
> (b) Optimal detector longitudinal view
> Figure 13: Four optimization scenarios are run with constant values of the trade-off parameter λ. Top: evolution in the loss space during optimization and the Pareto front. Bottom: resulting calorimeter longitudinal view.

This surrogate-based approach enables e ffi cient exploration of the calorimeter design space while maintaining compatibil-ity with realistic detector simulations and reconstruction algo-rithms. 

3.2.3. End-to-end Bayesian Optimization 

In alternative to the gradient-based optimization scheme in Sec. 3.2.2, which relies on local surrogate models, we study a global blackbox optimization approach using Bayesian opti-mization (kriging), as illustrated in Fig. 10b. To perform this reference optimization, several adjustments to the previously described setup are required: 

• As this method does not require optimizing a local surro-gate over multiple sampled detector layers, both classifica-tion and regression models are simplified and only trained on a single detector layout without requiring conditioning the model on the target detector layout. The previously in-troduced features are therefore removed from the network architectures. 

• Further, Bayesian optimization requires a well-defined, bounded search domain for continuous variables. For the detector layer thicknesses, the admissible design space is therefore restricted to box constraints 

t·,i ∈ { t ∈ R+|0 cm ≤ t ≤ 50 cm } , (18) limiting the search space to layer thicknesses of up to 50 cm. We further define a log-uniform prior over the box constraint interval, defining a search space in which both small and large thicknesses are adequately explored, re-flecting their disproportionate impact on detector perfor-mance and cost. With those changes, we can perform an optimization of the objective in Eq. 16, where new detector layouts are sampled according to an acquisition function computed from a Gaussian process surrogate model. We implement Bayesian optimization using BOTorch (97) with a Quasi MC-based batch Expected Hypervolume Improve-ment (qEHVI) acquisition function (98) minimizing over the multi-objective criterion in Eq. 16. The geometric constraints outlined in Eq. 16 are handled by the qEHVI acquisition func-tion as soft constraints, weighting the expected hypervolume improvement by the posterior probability of feasibility. To en-sure a comparable optimization budget while accounting for the parallelization evaluation structure of the gradient-free ap-proach, we increase the number of iterations to 500, with 100 of them allocated for the initial design of experiments (DoE). We further perform five independent design studies, measuring the uncertainty and variation in both objectives across optimiza-tions, quantifying the stability of the obtained design. 

Results. Figure 14 presents the best-so-far utilities for clas-sification and regression losses for the optimization, with the mean best-so-far results marked together with the min-max in-terval across design studies. We find for both objectives a sig-nificant improvement in both objective dimensions over time. Yet, we find for the reconstruction objective a stronger conver-gence compared to the classification objective, presented by a much narrower band of the min-max interval. Consequently, the classification task demonstrates being much more sensitive to initialization and the resulting design specifications sampled during the design of the experiment phase. Finding consis-tently well-performing detector layouts for high-quality parti-cle identification likely requires a larger optimization budget or further tuning, enabling a more thorough exploration of the search space. This observation is consistent with the AIDO use case: although the detector can be initialized to a feasible start-ing point, reducing sensitivity of initialization, the higher com-plexity of the classification task amplifies surrogate modeling errors, leading to instabilities in the optimization convergence. Building upon those results, the joint performance of the op-timization studies is presented and analysed in Fig. 15. Each coloured curve represents an estimated Pareto frontier of non-dominated, feasible designs obtained by jointly optimizing de-tector and reconstruction-software parameters. All sampled 24 Figure 14: Best-so-far reconstruction loss Lreco and classification loss Lclass over 500 iterations of Bayesian optimization. Solid curves show the mean best-observed objective value across optimization runs, and shaded regions indicate the corresponding min–max envelope over five independent calorimeter design studies.       

> Figure 15: Estimated Pareto fronts for Lreco and Lclass obtained from five independent calorimeter design studies. Each colored curve represents the non-dominated frontier of feasible designs. Gray and colored markers denote feasible and infeasible configurations.

feasible and infeasible designs for each study are marked in the design studies colour and gray, respectively. Figure 16 visualizes a subset of Pareto-optimal designs, highlighting the variability of layouts that achieve competi-tive trade-o ff s between reconstruction and classification per-formance. We find, similar to the results in Fig. 14, that regression-dominated solutions remain highly consistent across optimization runs, whereas designs that emphasize classifica-tion performance show increasing variability. 

3.2.4. End-to-end calorimeter optimization with mutual infor-mation surrogates 

In addition to the studies described supra , we investigate the optimization of a sampling calorimeter detector using an infor-mation theoretic objective. The sampling calorimeter under in-vestigation is composed of three layers, each consisting of a passive absorber and an active scintillator element. The ma-

> Figure 16: Selected number of detector layouts that are located along the Pareto frontier obtained during Bayesian optimization.

25 terials are fixed in this study to lead (Pb) for the absorber and polystyrene ((C 8H8)n) followed by two lead tungstate (PbWO 4)segments for the scintillators. The detector parameters for op-timization are the layer segment thicknesses tA,i and tS ,i for 

i ∈ { 1, 2, 3}.

Proposed solution: Mutual Information Surrogate. Here we adopt the Mutual Information Surrogate approach presented in Ref. (99), which is based on two central components. First, we train a deep learning–based surrogate model that approximates the performance metric locally in the detector design parameter space (42). Second, we employ mutual information (100, 101) as the performance metric. This information-theoretic objec-tive measures the amount of information about the underlying physical quantities retained by the detector configuration {tA,i

and tS ,i}i, independent of any specific reconstruction algorithm or downstream analysis. The co-design aspect here is implicit :By maximizing mutual information, the framework provides a task-agnostic and formally well-defined generic criterion for detector design. The goal is to identify the design configuration of the detector Dh that optimizes mutual information MI for a set of physics processes X, yielding 

h∗ = arg min 

> h∈H

MI (X, Dh(X)) ,

where H B

Y

> i

Hi

and Hi B R+ × R+ .

(19) As in the previous approaches, practical constraints, such as material budgets or cost limitations, can be incorporated di-rectly into the optimization procedure. By providing a di ff erentiable approximation of the simulation-based objective, this approach enables e ffi cient, gradient-based optimization of the detector design. 

Data. We generalize the experimental setup introduced in Ref. (99) to a multi-particle scenario. As above, we generate a dataset by simulating single incident photons ( γ) and positrons (e+) with energy uniformly sampled between 5 and 20 GeV us-ing G eant 4. Only the energy deposited in the active scintillator layers is recorded. Layer thickness values in centimeters define the design pa-rameter vector tA, tS ∈ RF , where F denotes the number of in-dependent geometric parameters per layer type ( e.g. F = 3 for three layers with separately optimized absorber and scintillator thicknesses). In the following we will use a single symbol for the concatenated absorber and scintillator thicknesses denoted as θ := tA|tS . Around a nominal configuration θ, we sample K

perturbed designs 

θk ∼ N (θ, σ )with σ = 1.5cm chosen on the order of one radiation length (102). This localized sampling follows a trust-region strategy (42, 103). For each θk, simulations yield true particle features xk and corresponding detector responses yk.GEN OPT SURR R(MINE) MI 

> Figure 17: Optimization scheme for the mutual-information-based surrogate method.

Methods & Models. The objective δ for each candidate design is defined as the mutual information between true particle fea-tures and detector responses 

δk = MI (xk; yk).

Mutual information is estimated using the objective model R - a neural mutual information estimator (104) based on variational bounds. A surrogate model S is trained to approximate the mapping 

S : θk 7 → δk.

We use a multilayer perceptron to model S . After training, gra-dients ∇θS (θ) are used to update the design parameters via gra-dient descent within the trust region. A penalty is added if the total detector thickness exceeds 35 cm. The updated parameter vector defines the next nominal configuration, and the proce-dure is repeated for a fixed number of iterations. The entire optimization loop is displayed in Fig. 17 and is composed of five steps: Generation of test points from the nom-inal parameter’s local neighborhood (step 1 O); simulation of M

photons and positrons incident on the detector, generating U

true features per particle xk ∈ RM×U , as well as their corre-sponding V measured calorimeter energy deposits yk ∈ RM×V

(step 2 O); application of the objective model R on the tuples 

{xk, yk}Kk=1 to estimate the mutual information objective δk for each neighborhood design configuration θk (step 3 O); The MLP surrogate model S is trained to predict this mutual information metric from the detector parameters: ˆδk = S (θk) (step 4 O); Fi-nally SGD is applied to identify the next optimal design param-eters by following the gradient of the surrogate − ∂S 

> ∂θ

, (step 5 O). The identified new θ restarts the next iteration or is returned if the maximum number of iterations has been reached. 

Experiments. We evaluate our surrogate framework in the opti-mization of the described simplified calorimeter detector where the optimization parameters θ correspond to the thicknesses of each layer segment. The set of studies investigates a three-layered calorimeter and 350 events of a photon and positron with an energy range of 1-20 GeV per parameter set candidate. The nominal parameter neighborhood is covered by 70 candidates. Initial segment thicknesses are 1.0 cm for both scintillators and 26 Figure 18: Layer segment thickness evolution (solid lines) and mutual infor-mation evolution (gray dashed) averaged over three runs for a three-layered calorimeter. Absorbers are shown in blue, scintillators in red. 

absorbers. All results are presented as the mean evolution with standard deviation, computed from three experimental runs. The thickness evolution of scintillators and absorbers are dis-played in Fig. 18. We observe that the optimization maximizes scintillator thicknesses while minimizing absobers, essentially reducing the latter to zero. This strategy enhances sensitivity to the physics process and absorbers are only of use when scin-tillators are too thin to fully contain high-energy particles (first iterations). Another interesting study looks at how mutual information re-lates to concrete physics-informed metrics commonly used at the LHC: for each of the particle types - photons and positrons - we compute the energy resolution and compare it to the evo-lution in mutual information (see Fig. 19). We observe that mutual information scales proportionally with the logarithm of the inverse resolution. The two metrics show a largely monotonic relationship for both particle types of pho-tons and positrons. 

3.2.5. Conclusion 

Further studies are required for a fully quantitative compar-ison; however, several qualitative conclusions can already be drawn. Both local-surrogate optimization via AIDO and global optimization with BO identify comparable regions of the Pareto front, indicating that similar solution spaces are explored. Fur-ther identified solutions on the estimated Pareto front show sim-ilar geometric patterns, demonstrating the robustness and suit-ability of both approaches for calorimeter codesign. Bayesian optimization provides a diverse set of non-dominated solutions, naturally enabling trade-o ff analysis between di ff erent designs. In contrast, AIDO achieves faster per-run convergence as only a single linear combination of objectives is optimized. By linear scalarization, weighting each contribution of objectives, the es-timates of the Pareto frontier can also be obtained. Previous re-sults in (42) indicate an improved sampling e ffi ciency of local-generative surrogates over BO, yet confirming this e ff ect for multi-objective optimization is non-trivial, as the approaches fundamentally di ff er in terms of optimization strategy and han-dling of multiple objective functions. Moreover, surrogate stability is a central limiting factor in AIDO, requiring further understanding of the internal mecha-nisms. We found that scheduling strategies during optimization are a central factor in stabilizing surrogate behavior. Finally, also the approach based on mutual-information sur-rogates successfully optimizes detector parameters in a multi-particle setting with photons and positrons. The optimization consistently favors increased scintillator thickness and reduced absorber thickness, demonstrating the feasibility of end-to-end, black-box deep-learning–based detector design using a single scalar objective. Since this objective is given by mutual infor-mation, it does not require explicit task definition, rendering the method task-agnostic and user-independent. While the mutual-information estimator must be retrained under distribution shifts, depends on su ffi ciently sampled marginal distributions, and does not naturally accommodate multi-objective weighting, the strong correlation observed with physics-informed perfor-mance metrics supports its role as a robust proxy for detector performance in optimization. 

3.3. Ground arrays for gamma-ray astronomy 

Here we consider the problem of optimizing the design of an array of detectors tasked with measuring the flux of high-energy gamma rays, their energy, and direction, using the detected sec-ondary particles produced by their extended air showers (EAS) or the Cherenkov light emitted with an EAS that propagates to the ground. 

3.3.1. Optimization of layout of shower front detectors: the case of SWGO 

One such project is the SWGO array, a proposed experiment which might consist of about 6,000 water tanks of 3.6 m diame-ter, deployed at 4,700 m altitude in the Chilean Andes (105). A detailed study of the optimization of the geometrical layout of the tanks on the ground (106), performed with the SWGOLO software (107), demonstrated how significant gains could be obtained by employing a three-component utility function sum-marizing the flux precision ϕγ –resulting from e ff ective discrim-ination of gamma rays from proton-induced showers and max-imization of the flux of signal events– along with the accuracy of energy and angular resolution σE , σ θ,

U = Uϕγ + UσE + Uσθ , (20) in conjunction with a gradient-descent optimization approach relying on a fully di ff erentiable model of EAS development, detection of secondary particles, and reconstruction of gamma-ray parameters. In the above-cited source authors considered as optimization parameters the ( xi, yi) positions on the ground of the centers of the tanks, when the latter were aggregated for simplicity into multi-tanks consisting of hexagonal arrangements of 7 or 19 tanks to reduce the number of free parameters. While already a rather complex task, the maximization of the utility U in Eq. 20 does not fully solve the design problem, as a number of details –concerning, e.g. , the performance of the tanks in terms of time 27 (a) Mutual information vs. energy resolution, photon (b) Mutual information vs. energy resolution, positron 

> Figure 19: Mutual information and energy ratio resolution: Comparison of photon (left) and positron (right) events. Results shown are averages over three runs.

resolution and particle discrimination capabilities, or the trig-gering strategy for data collection– were fixed in the model to suitable approximations. The reason for that choice was a focus of the cited work on the exploration of the possible geometrical configurations and their e ff ect on shower reconstruction, rather than on the bigger problem of finding a complete solution of the experiment optimization task. Here we extend that model to in-clude in it consideration of a few parameters that control the performance of single tanks as well as triggering schemes for data collection, setting to ourselves the task of appraising the gains in performance that can be brought by the inclusion of those additional parameters in the design space during an end-to-end optimization, with respect to a two-stage optimization that only deals with the added parameters after the optimization of the layout. For the sake of the present study we also find it useful to upgrade the utility definition of Eq. 20, to overcome the requirement of some manual tuning of component weights ( 

ηGF , η IR , η PR ) and the lack of a natural encoding of the cou-pled nature of flux sensitivity, angular resolution, and energy resolution for the scientific goals of the experiment (108). Amore unified treatment that takes inspiration from typical search methods for astrophysical sources in the sky is suggested by the so-called "on-o ff problem", where the signal rate S from a point source in the sky is a ff ected by an additional di ff use back-ground rate B. By looking "o ff -source", a telescope or other detection apparatus may estimate B, allowing a subtraction of background contributions in the "on-source" region, provided that a proper normalization depending on the ratio of areas and integration time is performed (109). As the detection of high-energy gamma-ray sources is one of the primary goals of SWGO, we consider the statistical significance of the signal re-sulting from a monochromatic (fixed energy) point source in the sky, for a given integration time, to be a sound proxy to the overall performance of the detection apparatus. We define the point-source utility as 

UPS = 1

t5σ

, (21) where t5σ is the data-taking time required to integrate a signal su ffi ciently large to correspond to a significance of five standard deviations, once accounting for backgrounds; this requires to specify a signal rate (in terms of number of photons per square km per year), which can be set to a small fraction of the total generated flux; the exact value of the signal rate does not a ff ect significantly the optimization task. We also use the following simplified formula for the pseudo-significance Z resulting from an excess of NS signal events over a Poisson-distributed back-ground contamination of mean NB:

Z = 2( pNB + NS − pNB). (22) From the above expression we can solve for NS 5σ by setting 

Z = 5; expressing NS as a function of e ff ective area and signal effi ciency yields 

UPS = 4Ae f f ϵγ

25 + 20 √NB

, (23) where Ae f f is the e ff ective area wherein the array is sensitive to showers, ϵγ is the reconstruction e ffi ciency of gamma-ray show-ers falling within Ae f f , and where NB is computed by adding to-gether the estimated contribution of real gamma rays from dif-fuse sources and the noise from hadronic showers reconstructed as gamma rays. The former is extracted from counting observed showers in the angular sideband around the signal region, while the latter is estimated from hadrons reconstructed in the signal region, multiplied by the misclassification probability of an op-timized selection cut on the likelihood ratio between the two hypotheses (gamma ray or hadron) on the primary particle: 

NB = NS R had × P f ake (h → γ) + NS B  

> γ

× τ , (24) where NS R had the number of protons in the signal region, 

P f ake (h → γ) is the probability that a hadronic shower is clas-sified as a gamma shower, Nγ is the number of gamma rays in the sidebands, and τ the extrapolation factor equal to the ratio betweeen the area of signal and sideband regions in the sky. 28 Defined as in Eq. 23, the utility unifies flux sensitivity, point-ing accuracy, and energy resolution in a single expression with-out the need to assign di ff erent arbitrary weights to each com-ponent as in Eq. 20. Energy resolution dependence comes from the inclusion as signal event candidates of showers in an energy range spanning the range [ −1.4σE , +1.4σE ] around the hypo-thetical energy of the source. For the results discussed in this work, we set E = 4 PeV as the energy of photons from the source in our optimization runs. We consider the following software parameters in our ex-tended model: 

• The minimum number of tanks detecting at least one sec-ondary particle in order for the event to be recorded and reconstructed, Ntrigger . Because of its direct e ff ect in de-termining which showers are included in the calculation of the utility UPS , a variation of Ntrigger will a ff ect the op-timality condition of any array. More in detail, a higher value of Ntrigger will generally improve the energy and angular resolution of detected showers (as showers with an insu ffi cient number of involved tanks will be removed from the sample where an average of these resolutions is evaluated), but it will reduce the flux (as the detection e ffi -ciency will globally decrease). 

• One further extension of the original SWGOLO modeling concerns the consideration of a distributed data acquisition scheme, whereby instead of sending their signal to a single central counting room for triggering and reconstruction, units are connected to a number of decentralized counting rooms, each of which has independently the capability to trigger data acquisition for showers that produce a signal in the nearby tanks. A decentralized scheme has the bene-fit of reducing the cost of cabling (signal and high voltage) from counting rooms to detection units, as well as improv-ing triggering capabilities, by exploiting the topology of showers, thus becoming less dependent on random back-ground counts in far-away detection units. The number of counting rooms can be jointly optimized with the other parameters, once their position is independently assessed by a clustering algorithm that minimizes the sum of linear distances from the units. 

• The time resolution of secondary particles detection in each tank, σt. A conservative and fixed value of 10 ns was assumed in the original version of the SWGOLO optimiza-tion code. This number a ff ects the precision of shower parameters reconstruction, as the time of arrival of secon-daries is directly involved in the estimation of the angle of incidence of the primary cosmic or gamma ray. While timing resolution is more properly defined as a hardware parameter rather than a software one, its value results from the quadrature sum of hardware as well as software e ff ects, some of which are not accessible at design time; hence an exploration of this parameter is useful. 

• The precision in the counting of secondary particles Ns

of each tank is also modeled by assuming a value for the relative uncertainty Rc = σNs /Ns delivered by a careful reconstruction of the photomultiplier readout signals. In order to further enrich the co-design aspects of the op-timization task, we also extend the capabilities of SWGOLO by allowing at each iteration for the appearance or disappear-ance of detection tanks. The cost of the N deployed tanks 

Cdets = NC tank (or Cdets = N MC tank , if N denotes the num-ber of macro-tanks comprising M tanks each) depends on the tank performance parameters Rc and σt. The cost of each tank is specified by a baseline cost (8000$) and by the timing and counting resolutions as 

Ctank = 8000$ + 10$ 

Rc + 0.001 + 5000$ 

σt/ns + 1 . (25) The above is a very rough and arbitrary model, which how-ever encodes the correct monotonicity of cost on the specified parameters: that is to first order su ffi cient to acquire an under-standing of the e ff ect of the two parameters on the optimality conditions, and to observe how they play in the end-to-end op-timization task. Other costs are connected with the area of the array ( Cland ), the total length of cables connecting each tank to the closest counting room ( Ccables ), the cost of counting rooms 

CCR , and the perimeter (whose corresponding cost C f ence is due to the need of fencing the facility), as detailed in Tab. 2. 

Cost item Cost in USD Applies to 

Land cost 0.5 $ /m2 whole array Leveling cost 1.4 $ /m2 times unit area, per detection unit Fencing cost 250 $ /m total perimeter Cabling cost 5 $ /m per unit and per meter to closest count. room Counting room cost 30,000 $ per counting room Baseline unit cost 8,000 $ per unit (σt = 10 ns , Rc = 0.05)  

> Table 2: Ingredients of the cost model for the SWGO array used in the opti-mization by the upgraded SWGOLO code. While only approximate, for the sake of the presented study these numbers are a reasonable guess of the actual cost of the various components.

The total experiment cost is defined as 

TC = Cland + Clevel + C f ence + Ccables + CCR + Cdets . (26) Rather than enforcing a hard budget constraint, we model cost as a di ff erentiable soft constraint via a smooth penalty function 

UTC (C), enabling gradient-based optimization. The penalty is a multiplier that takes the value of 1 .0 in a range exceeding a minimum value and below a maximum budget, and decreases quickly for values outside. The function has the following form: 

UTC (C) = 1 + Er f [( C − m)/σ ]2 , C < m + M

2 ; (27) 

UTC (C) = 1 − Er f [( C − M)/σ ]2 , C ≥ m + M

2 , (28) 29 where m and M are minimum and maximum cost, respectively, and σ is a smoothing width. Taking stock, we are setting up an optimization task where synchronously with the gradient de-scent procedure searching for the optimal layout of all tanks, the software jointly looks for the optimal value of a triggering threshold Ntrigger , of the number of counting rooms NCR , and of the most e ff ective number of deployed tanks Nunit , accounting for their cost in the global utility; the model is also enriched by consideration of the e ff ect of the resolution in time and num-ber of secondary particles in each detection tank, which jointly aff ect cost from the software design side of the problem. The utility target is 

U = UPS × UTC . (29) The integration of a search for the best value of the consid-ered co-design parameters Ndet , Ntrigger , NCR , σ t, Rc in the up-graded version of SWGOLO we employ here is performed by adopting a reinforcement learning approach. This is cast as a batched structured multi-armed bandit formulation, where each arm corresponds to a discrete detector-configuration choice (number of units, trigger threshold, and number of trigger zones). Arm selection is guided by a Thompson-sampling–inspired score (110), combined with ϵ-greedy explo-ration (111) to ensure continued sampling of sub-optimal con-figurations. Multiple arms are evaluated per iteration, placing the method in a batched bandit setting. For each selected arm, a local continuous refinement of detector performance param-eters is performed via stochastic perturbations by gradient de-scent. This results in a hybrid discrete–continuous optimization strategy inspired by structured and combinatorial bandit meth-ods. At selected gradient descent iterations (every iteration in the first third of the run; every third iteration until the second third of the run; and every six iterations until the end), besides com-puting the gradient of the total utility with respect to the move-ment of each detection unit, a set of up to 8 di ff erent evalua-tions of the utility are performed by varying the five additional parameters according to proposed distributions that are updated depending on their outcome; the parameter set resulting in the best utility value is compared to the baseline, and if it provides an improved utility it is chosen for the next two validation itera-tions, along with updated unit positions; if the two further eval-uations of the utility confirm the improvement, the new param-eter set becomes the new baseline. When Ndet is varied (always by multiples of 3 units, to preserve the symmetry of the layout –see below), new triplets of units sharing the same radius and arranged in an equilateral triangle arrangement are removed or added; when they are added, their square radius is chosen uni-formly within [0 , (1 .5r)2], where r is the current radius of the array being considered, and the azimuthal position of one of the three units is chosen uniformly in [0 , 2π/ 3]. For our tests we consider an array initially set in a con-figuration of Ndet = 684 detectors arranged into 36 macro-units 7. The array is made up of concentric circles of 6 +12 +18 

> 7A macro-unit is a tightly packed hexagonal arrangement of 19 units.

equispaced macro-units, with an initial radius of the array of 1200 m; this rather large-radius array is already close to opti-mality in terms of its extension on the ground, considering the problem of e ff ectively detecting a 4-PeV gamma-ray source. Units are defined to be in the baseline performance configura-tion ( Rc = 0.05 , σ t = 10 ns ); the other parameters are set to 

NCR = 3 and Ntrigger = 80. These parameters define the ini-tial cost C = 10 , 307 , 700 US dollars of the array, which in turn defines the maximum cost (Eq. 28) as M = 2.0C, and the minimum cost as m = 0.2C). In such a way, we give to the opti-mization scan the flexibility to increase the total cost in the way that maximizes the value of the combined utility U of Eq. 29. As was done in the studies of the stem publication (106), we exploit the azimuthal symmetry of the problem by enforc-ing that the same configuration of units and counting rooms is repeated in three 120-degree sections. We perform 500-epoch runs with di ff erent choices for the co-design parameters varied in the optimization; following these runs, we follow up with new ones where previously variable parameters are fixed to their optimal value, to search for the optimal value of the ones initially left fixed; in the new runs we still allow for position updates by gradient descent. A summary of the results is provided in Tab. 3, while Fig. 20 shows Pareto fronts of the optimization scans. As shown in Tab. 3, the simultaneous scanning of all design parameters –"hardware" ones as well as "software" ones– out-performs serial approaches that simplify the search by reducing it to the scanning of two subspaces one after the other. The sub-optimality ratio defined in Sec. 1 is not computed in full by averaging over all possible initial conditions in this example, as the full optimization scans involve a large CPU load (one to two weeks of running on a 32-core machine per each of the four tests of Tab. 3). Still, the single test we run su ffi ces to exem-plify how there is a significant decrease in performance of serial scans with respect to the co-design approach, with the single-instance SR evaluation taking variable values ranging between 1.06 and 1 .22. In addition, Fig. 20 shows distributions of the area scanned by the di ff erent optimization strategies, highlight-ing the wider reach of the full scan. In particular, from those distributions one notices that scans 2a /2b, which leave out of the initial search the trigger strategy parameters Ntrigger and 

NCR , fail to discover the small-Ntrigger solution picked up by the full scan. These results demonstrate how co-design enables the exploration of regions of the design space inaccessible to se-rial optimization, leading to consistent improvements in global utility. Serial scans fail to achieve full optimality because cost couples discrete and continuous parameters non-separably, so optimizing one subspace shifts the optimum in the other. 

3.3.2. CTAO array layout optimization via Monte Carlo co-design 

An additional example of non-decomposable optimization in ground-based gamma-ray astronomy is provided by the design of the layout of the Cherenkov Telescope Array Observatory (CTAO) (112), constituted by Imaging Atmospheric Cherenkov Telescopes (IACTs) that detect the Cherenkov radiation (UV-optical light) emitted within an EAS at the passage of a cos-30 Run ID Epochs δxy δNdet δNtrigger , δ NCR δσ t, δ Rc U/U0 gain S R Description 0a 1-500 y y n n 1.220 ± 0.037 SGD scan varying only Nunits 

0b 501-1000 y n y y 1.485 ± 0.056 1.220 ± 0.059 Subsequent scan of other pars 1a 1-500 y y y n 1.052 ± 0.040 SGD scan varying all but detector pars 1b 501-1000 y n n y 1.498 ± 0.042 1.210 ± 0.049 Subsequent scan of detector pars 2a 1-500 y y n y 1.659 ± 0.048 SGD scan varying all but trigger pars 2b 501-1000 y n y n 1.707 ± 0.052 1.062 ± 0.045 Subsequent scan of trigger pars 3 1-500 y y y y 1.812 ± 0.054 1.0 Full co-design scan 

Table 3: Results of optimization runs with di ff erent choices of optimizable parameters. The quoted U/U0 ratios in all cases take as reference U0 the same default parameters ( Ntrigger = 80; NCR = 3; σt = 10 ns ; Rc = 0.05) and layout conditions (a circular array of 36 initial macro-units). S R indicates the estimated sub-optimality ratio of Eq. 1. See the text for detail. 

Figure 20: The highest value of the total utility U (Eq. 29) obtained by the layouts during the scans reported in Tab. 3 is shown as a function of the value of utility components UIR (horizontal axes) and UPR (vertical axes). For each of the investigated bins in the plane the graphs report the highest U value found at those coordinates, such that the colour of the bins map the Pareto front. The di ff erent areas in the space of components UIR and UPR (which respectively provide an indirect measure of energy and angular resolution) sampled by the di ff erent serial scans (0a /0b, 1a /1b, 2a /2b) reflects their limited ability of working around cost constraints, due to fixed parameters. The full scan of the design parameters (3, top right) can instead reach a non-trivial solution (which accepts a lower energy resolution in exchange of higher flux sensitivity and angular resolution) and a higher total U value. Red circles show the value of UIR and UPR of the highest-U

layout for each of the four optimization strategies. 

31 Figure 21: Illustrative CTAO baseline layouts for the Southern (left) and Northern (right) sites. Circles /squares indicate LST /MST /SST classes as in the Consortium documentation. 

mic gamma ray at about 10 km heigh and propagating to the ground. CTAO is a next-generation facility for very-high-energy gamma-ray astronomy, consisting of two arrays, one lo-cated in the southern hemisphere (Atacama Desert, Chile), and one in the northern hemisphere (La Palma, Spain). The south-ern array features a mix of large-sized telescopes (LSTs, 28 m diameter, optimized for low energies), medium-sized telescopes (MSTs, 12 m optmized for intermediate energies), and small-sized telescopes (SSTs, 6 m optimized for high energies), while the northern array consists primarily of LSTs and MSTs (112). Their preliminary layouts are shown in Fig. 21. The final layout of the CTAO arrays (North and South) is cur-rently under definition by comparing a finite set of candidate configurations through full detector Monte Carlo (MC) simula-tions (113). Each candidate layout L specifies (i) the number of telescopes per class {NLST , NMST , NSST }, (ii) their positions {rt}

subject to site constraints (terrain, exclusion zones, infrastruc-ture), and (iii) class-dependent hardware options (optics, cam-era, trigger) coupled to reconstruction settings. All has fixed budget. This is an inherently non-decomposable problem: array geometry, camera /trigger design, and software reconstruction (image cleaning, direction /energy estimators, event selection) jointly determine performance. For each L, the MC chain simulates atmospheric air show-ers, Cherenkov light propagation, optics and camera response, array trigger and readout, followed by reconstruction and event classification. From these, performance summaries are derived as functions of energy E and zenith angle θ:

Aeff (E, θ ; L), σθ(E, θ ; L), σlog E (E, θ ; L), bE (E, θ ; L) ,

(30) where Aeff (E, θ ; L) is the e ff ective area, σθ(E, θ ; L) the angular resolution, σlog E (E, θ ; L) the energy resolution, and B(E, θ ; L)the residual background rate. To compare layouts against a diversified science program 

{S k} (Galactic /Extragalactic transients, extended sources, sur-vey), one can adopt a weighted utility that aggregates key met-rics over energy and sky: 

U(L) =

X

> k

wk

Z Z " wA

Aeff (E, θ ; L) + wΩ σθ(E, θ ; L)

+ wE σlog E (E, θ ; L) + wb |bE (E, θ ; L)|

+ wB

B(E, θ ; L)

Aeff (E, θ ; L)

#

dμk(E, θ ) + wC C(L),

(31) In Eq. 31, the term Aeff (E, θ ; L) denotes the e ff ective collec-tion area, whose inverse is weighted by wA to penalize small apertures that reduce sensitivity. The factor σθ(E, θ ; L) rep-resents the angular resolution, scaled by wΩ, since narrower point-spread functions enhance source localization. The en-ergy resolution σlog E (E, θ ; L), multiplied by wE , accounts for the precision of spectral measurements, while the energy bias 

bE (E, θ ; L) enters as an absolute value weighted by wb, reflect-ing the importance of unbiased energy reconstruction. The background rate B(E, θ ; L) is normalized by the e ff ective area and weighted by wB, capturing the trade-o ff between sensitivity and contamination. The integration measure dμk(E, θ ) encodes the spectral and angular distributions of events relevant to sci-ence case k, with wk as the corresponding priority weight. Fi-nally, C(L) represents the cost associated with layout L, scaled by wC , ensuring that resource constraints are included in the optimization. The optimization proceeds iteratively: 1. Design generation: propose a set of layouts L(m) that satisfy site constraints and minimum separations (within-class and inter-class). 2. MC and reconstruction: for each L(m), run the full MC and 

retune trigger thresholds, image cleaning, gamma–hadron separation, and energy /direction estimators (software is optimized per layout ). 32 3. Scoring and selection: compute U(L(m)) via Eq. 31; re-tain Pareto-optimal layouts when multiple objectives are considered explicitly ( e.g. , maximize survey speed while minimizing point-source sensitivity threshold). 4. Refinement: around high-performing L(m), generate lo-cal perturbations in telescope positions and counts, repeat MC, and update the Pareto front until improvements satu-rate. Because site conditions and science drivers di ff er, the optimal 

North layout typically favors LST /MST configurations tuned for low-to-middle energies and extragalactic targets, whereas the South layout leverages large MST /SST footprints for Galac-tic sources and the multi-TeV regime. The weights {wk} and ex-posure measures dμk are thus site-specific, ensuring that Eq. 31 reflects the intended program of each hemisphere. To reduce MC cost across large layout banks, surrogate mod-els (Gaussian processes, gradient-boosted regressors, or small neural surrogates) can be trained to predict ( Aeff , σ θ, σ log E , B)from geometric descriptors (radial density profiles, inter-telescope spacings, class ratios). These surrogates guide the search and are periodically recalibrated against full MC points to control modeling bias. If reconstruction parameters were fixed across layouts, or if geometry were chosen without re-optimizing trigger /cleaning /classifiers, the resulting solutions would be systematically sub-optimal. The sub-optimality ra-tio S R = Userial /Ucodesign (see Eq. 1) empirically departs from unity in such “serial” choices, highlighting that geometry and software must be co-optimized within the same loop. 

3.4. Calibration of Cherenkov Telescope Cameras 

> Figure 22: Examples of simulated Cherenkov shower images for di ff erent cam-era designs used in CTA and SWGO, including LST, NectarCam, FlashCam, SCT, CHEC, SST-1M, and ASTRI. Reproduced from Ref. (114).

The calibration of Cherenkov telescopes cameras (see Fig. 22 for some camera proposed for the the mentioned CTAO) off ers another paradigmatic example of a non-decomposable problem, where hardware (spectral quantum effi ciency of PMTs, ageing, calibration hardware) and software (weighting of spectra, drift correction models) must be jointly optimized. Each camera hosts on the order of O(10 3) photomultiplier tubes (PMTs), or O(10 4) silicon photomultipliers (SiPMs). Focusing on the formers, each PMTs has a wavelength-dependent quan-tum e ffi ciency Qi(λ) and a time-dependent degradation factor 

Ai(λ, t) due to ageing e ff ects. The e ff ective photon detection effi ciency of channel i at time t can thus be modeled as 

ηi(λ, t) = Qi(λ) · Ai(λ, t) . (32) The relative calibration of the PMTs is extremely impor-tant to reduce bias in energy and angular reconstruction. The calibration typically relies on reference light pulses produced by a dedicated HW, which includes LEDs at selected wave-lengths (115). How many wavelengths and which wavelengths, remains an optimization problem. If calibration is performed at a single wavelength λc, one estimates an e ff ective response ηi(λc, t) and rescales accord-ingly. However, the true science signal is integrated over a broad Cherenkov spectrum S (λ), so the reconstructed response depends on the spectral overlap: 

Ri(t) =

R S (λ) ηi(λ, t) dληi(λc, t) . (33) When only one calibration wavelength is used, the residual bias scales with the slope of ηi(λ, t) around λc and the mismatch between λc and the e ff ective mean ⟨λ⟩ of the Cherenkov spec-trum (116). To first order, the error can be approximated as 

∆Ri ∝ ∂η i

∂λ λc

(⟨λ⟩ − λc) . (34) Using two calibration wavelengths λ1, λ 2 allows one to also constrain the first derivative of the spectral response, e ff ec-tively correcting for slope-induced biases. Extending to three wavelengths λ1, λ 2, λ 3 further enables estimation of curvature, mitigating residuals due to higher-order spectral distortions or ageing-induced changes in spectral shape. This strategy has been discussed both in CTA calibration design (117, 115) and in earlier studies (116). A practical wavelength choice protocol could be as fol-lows: select a central pivot wavelength near the median of the Cherenkov spectrum; add two calibration wavelengths near the 20% and 80% quantiles of the detected spectrum; and option-ally add a third wavelength close to the pivot to stabilize slope estimates. This selection balances sensitivity to spectral slope and curvature against hardware complexity. Calibration LEDs in CTA boxes currently span UV to near-IR ranges, allowing such strategies to be implemented in practice (115). To quantify the advantage of multi-wavelength calibration, we define a utility function U balancing calibration accuracy and cost: 

U(Nλ) = 1

wcalib σ2calib (Nλ) + wdrift σ2drift (Nλ) − C(Nλ) , (35) where Nλ is the number of calibration wavelengths, σ2calib the residual calibration error, σ2drift the long-term stability error, 

wcalib , wdrift their relative weights, and C the operational cost (increasing with Nλ). The sub-optimality ratio (SR) introduced in Sec. 1.1 can then be estimated by comparing U(Nλ = 1) to 

U(Nλ = 2, 3), showing that single-λ calibration can be signifi-cantly sub-optimal (SR < 0.7 in toy models (116)). 33 Finally, a possible calibration protocol integrating hardware and software aspects is: periodic calibration at 2–3 wavelengths spanning the sensitive band; continuous monitoring of LED sta-bility and PMT gain; software modeling of spectral drift us-ing historical calibration data; and periodic re-optimization of wavelength choices as the system ages. This case study highlights the co-design nature of Cherenkov telescope calibration: hardware QE, spectral ageing, and cali-bration sources interact with software reconstruction and drift models, making joint optimization unavoidable (118, 116). 

3.5. Neutrino Astronomy 

Neutrino astronomy has developed into a major pillar of as-troparticle physics since the discovery of a di ff use astrophysical neutrino flux by IceCube in 2013 (119, 120), followed by the first evidence for individual high-energy neutrino sources (121, 122, 123, 124) and the recent observation of an extremely en-ergetic cosmic neutrino by KM3Net (125). Because neutrinos interact only weakly and are not deflected by magnetic fields, they uniquely probe dense and distant astrophysical environ-ments, motivating the construction of increasingly large detec-tors. Several optical neutrino observatories are currently un-der construction or in development, including KM3NeT (126), Baikal-GVD (127), P-ONE (128), and IceCube-Gen2 (129), aiming to extend sensitivity in the TeV–PeV range. Com-plementary to this, radio detection techniques exploiting the Askaryan e ff ect enable cost-e ff ective instrumentation of the vastly larger volumes required for EeV energies, as demon-strated by experiments such as ARA, ARIANNA, and RNO-G (130, 131), and foreseen for IceCube-Gen2 (129). The opti-mization of future neutrino telescopes bears huge potential to accelerate progress in astroparticle physics. However, tradi-tional optimization is not tractable due to the high-dimensional design parameter space that cannot be explored e ffi ciently with forward Monte Carlo simulations (132). Consequently, detec-tor layouts have historically been guided by physical intuition and incremental scaling rather than systematic end-to-end opti-mization. Here, we outline how such an end-to-end optimiza-tion could be achieved and present a proof-of-concept using a toy detector setup. The parameters of interest in high-energy neutrino telescopes are the properties of the detected neutrino events. These are not directly accessible but must be inferred from the electronic signals measured by the detectors. Furthermore, neutrinos are only detectable by measuring secondary particles produced in neutrino-matter interactions. The electronic signal ("data") is related to the properties ⃗ θν of the original neutrino (such as di-rection, interaction position, neutrino type, energy) by the like-lihood: 

L(⃗θν | data ,⃗ θ det .) = p(data | θν,⃗ θ det .), (36) where ⃗ θdet . is the parameters of the detector ( e.g. , the positions of the optical modules /antennas) and p(data | θν,⃗ θ det .) is the probability density function (PDF) of the data given the neu-trino and detector parameters. If the likelihood can be formu-lated (or approximated su ffi ciently well), the reconstruction res-olution can be estimated through the Fisher information and the Rao-Cramer-Fréchet bound. The Fisher information matrix (here for the neutrino param-eters) is defined as 

Ii j (⃗ θν |⃗ θdet .) = E

" ∂log L

∂θ ν, i

· ∂log L

∂θ ν, j⃗ θdet .

#

. (37) The Rao-Cramér-Frechet bound then states that the covariance of any unbiased estimator T (⃗θν |⃗ θdet .) of the parameters ⃗ θν is bounded by: cov( T (⃗θν |⃗ θdet .)) ≥ I −1(⃗θν |⃗ θdet .). (38) The Rao-Cramér-Frechet bound thus provides a lower bound on the achievable detector resolution for measuring the neutrino energy and direction, which are the parameters of primary in-terest. Using the uncertainty estimate through the Fisher informa-tion substantially simplifies the problem. We no longer need to perform a reconstruction of simulated data, which is time-consuming and challenging to make di ff erentiable. Instead, as shown in Eq. 37, only a di ff erentiable likelihood function is needed. In the case of an in-ice radio neutrino detector, such as RNO-G or IceCube-Gen2, Eq. 37 takes a particularly simple form. The likelihood can be modelled as a multivariate Gaus-sian (133), which reduces the Fisher information calculation to 

Ii j (⃗ θν |⃗ θdet .) =

X

> antennas

∂μ(⃗θν,⃗ θ det .)T

∂θ ν, i

Σ−1 ∂μ(⃗θν,⃗ θ det .)

∂θ ν, j

, (39) where Σ is the covariance matrix of the noise, μ(⃗ θν,⃗ θ det .) is the signal model, i.e. ., it predicts the measured signal vs. time in an antenna based on the neutrino parameters θν, i, and it can easily be summed over the antennas measuring the sig-nal. Thus, the problem reduces to constructing a di ff erentiable signal model, which can be readily obtained through analytic approximations and /or neural network surrogate models. An initial proof-of-concept was presented in Ref. (134), using the surrogate Askaryan emission model presented in Ref. (135). A similar strategy can be formulated for optical Cherenkov neutrino telescopes, where the measured data consist of pho-ton arrival times and amplitudes recorded by photomultiplier tubes distributed throughout a large detection volume. In this case, the likelihood is determined by the expected spatio-temporal light distribution produced by charged secondary par-ticles propagating through the medium, which depends on the neutrino interaction parameters as well as on detector proper-ties such as sensor positions, angular acceptance, and optical properties of the medium. As discussed in Ref. (136), the pho-ton propagation and detection process can be described by dif-ferentiable light-yield and transport models that predict the ex-pected photoelectron rates at each sensor. Under commonly used assumptions of Poissonian photon counting statistics with approximately independent sensor responses, the Fisher infor-mation can again be expressed in terms of derivatives of the pre-dicted sensor responses with respect to both event and detector parameters. This enables a computationally e ffi cient estimation 34 of achievable reconstruction resolutions without explicit event reconstruction and provides a natural framework for gradient-based optimization of detector geometries, such as string spac-ing and module density. The optimization procedure closely follows the paradigm used in training neural networks. In practice, simulated neu-trino interactions are processed in batches, for which the gradi-ents of a chosen performance objective, derived from the Fisher information, with respect to detector parameters (such as sen-sor positions or deployment depths) are computed through au-tomatic di ff erentiation. These gradients are then used to iter-atively update the detector configuration via stochastic gradi-ent–descent–type algorithms, enabling an e ffi cient exploration of the high-dimensional design space. To ensure realistic so-lutions, the objective function is augmented by additional cost terms that encode practical constraints, including the increased financial and logistical cost associated with deeper drillings or denser instrumentation, as well as engineering and deployment limitations. This results in a constrained optimization frame-work that naturally balances physics performance against feasi-bility considerations. Comprehensive end-to-end optimization studies for next-generation neutrino observatories are currently in progress. In particular, a full co-design framework is being developed for the optical P-ONE detector, targeting the joint optimization of array geometry and sensor configuration for best reconstruction performance, as well as for the planned radio array component of IceCube-Gen2, where the station and array layout is opti-mized with respect to physics-driven performance metrics in the NuRadioOpt project (137). To illustrate the technique discussed in this section, we present a simple toy optimization experiment that can easily be validated. The study focuses on the one-dimensional op-timization of a single antenna depth for an IceCube-Gen2 ra-dio detector station. The nominal design of one of the station types is shown in Fig. 23, which has four downward-facing log-periodic dipole antennas (LPDAs) and one vertically po-larized dipole antenna (Vpol). The optimal depth of the Vpol is expected to be a trade-o ff between two competing e ff ects: at greater depths, the triangulation of the neutrino interaction vertex improves, but the signal strength decreases. In this toy study, the depth of the Vpol antenna is optimized 10 times with di ff erent initial positions to validate that the same optimum is found for any initialization. We employ the prototype fully dif-ferentiable simulation and reconstruction pipeline presented in Ref. (134), which was later expanded to include most phys-ical e ff ects of state-of-the-art radio neutrino simulations, see, 

e.g. , NuRadioMC (138). The dataset used for the optimization contains 100,000 neutrino neutral-current interactions with de-posited energy in the 10 16 .5 eV to 10 17 .5 eV range that fulfil the trigger condition. The dataset is then split and processed in batches of 356 events. For simplicity, we treat the trigger op-timization independently from the antenna position optimiza-tion. In this example, the trigger is only calculated from the four LPDA antennas, i.e. ., the depth of the Vpol antenna does not impact whether the neutrino interaction is detected or not. In future studies the trigger antennas can be incorporated in the        

> Figure 23: Schematic of a shallow IceCube-Gen2 radio detector station. Only the downward-facing LPDAs and Vpol antennas are considered in this study. Figure adapted from Ref. (129). 0500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
> Iteration
> 150
> 125
> 100
> 75
> 50
> 25
> 0
> zVpol  [m]
> Optimizations
> Optimal depth
> Epochs
> Figure 24: Repeated optimizations of the depth of the Vpol antenna ( zVpol ) for a shallow IceCube-Gen2 radio detector station with di ff erent initial depths. The optimal depth is determined from the scan shown in Fig. 25.

optimization by assigning every event a weight corresponding to its trigger e ffi ciency. The loss function is then the log 10 of the Rao-Cramér-Fréchet lower bound estimate of the neutrino direction reconstruction uncertainty in square degrees. For sim-plicity, we refrain from adding a cost function that would pe-nalize increased costs due to the drilling of deeper holes. The optimizations are run with an initial learning rate of 0.2, an ex-ponential learning rate decay, and a convergence criterion of no improvement for two epochs. The resulting optimizations are shown in Fig. 24, which demonstrates stable convergence to the same solution for any starting depth. In order to vali-date that the solution is optimal, a one-dimensional scan of the neutrino direction uncertainty is shown in Fig. 25, which was calculated with the di ff erentiable pipeline. The minimum of the scan is consistent with the solution found by the optimizations. Hence, the method discussed in this section reliably finds the optimal detector layout for this simple toy example. Additionally, we test optimised geometry generation using a simple toy experiment inspired by the P-ONE optical neutrino 35 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 

> zVpol [m]
> 4.5
> 5.0
> 5.5
> 6.0
> 6.5
> Mean direction uncertainty [deg 2]
> Uncertainty scan
> Optimal depth Figure 25: Rao-Cramér-Fréchet lower bound estimate of the neutrino direction reconstruction uncertainty as a function of depth of the Vpol antenna ( zVpol )calculated with the di ff erentiable simulation and reconstruction pipeline.

detector concept in deep sea water. The aim is to generate mul-tiple geometries that satisfy di ff erentiable engineering and cost constraints. The ability to generate multiple feasible geome-tries is essential for exploring Pareto fronts, which are increas-ingly relevant in multi-objective optimisation problems arising in large-scale neutrino detector design. An optical neutrino detector is composed of long cables that hold optical modules (OMs), referred to as a string. The con-straints considered here are (i) the maximum number of deploy-able strings, determined by cost considerations, and (ii) the total instrumented area available for detector construction. We as-sume a maximum of 70 strings and constrain the detector foot-print to a circular area with a radius of 1 km. For P-ONE, a single string holds in chain up to 20 OMs, each housing mul-tiple PMTs. For simplicity we assume only a single PMT per OM and do not consider the its directionality. A further engineering constraint arises from deployment and maintenance operations involving remotely operated vehicles (ROVs) on the Pacific Ocean seabed. A minimum safe-space must be maintained to allow for contingency procedures. In the event of loss of ROV control (“dead sub”), a predefined safe heading combined with winch control enables extraction from within a cluster of strings. Similarly, in the case of dynamic positioning (DP) failure of the support vessel, manual control can be used to guide the ROV into a safe evacuation region. These operational requirements impose a geometric constraint on string placement: for any constellation of three strings form-ing an 80 m equilateral triangle, a rectangular clearance region of 300 m × 160 m must be available in at least one direction around a given string. Figure 26 illustrates the ROV safe-space configuration. In this toy study, we assume a spatially uniform signal dis-tribution and do not employ neutrino event surrogates, as the primary focus is the generation of geometries under multiple di ff erentiable constraints. The uniform signal acts as a driver favouring a larger number of active strings, counterbalanced by string production and deployment costs. Optimisation is performed on a dense base configuration con-

> Figure 26: Top-down view of the ROV safe-space required for the deployment and maintenance of a P-ONE detector array /string (right-most red dot), in a constellation of 3 strings. Image provided by the P-ONE Collaboration.

sisting of 1000 candidate string positions arranged in a hexag-onal packing. Each string is assigned a continuous weight wi,which parametrizes the geometry. Strings with weights above a chosen threshold are considered active. This relaxed param-eterization enables gradient-based optimisation in a continuous design space and is inspired by similar approaches used in the optimisation of gravitational-wave detector networks (139). For the ROV constraint applied to the i-th string, we define a di ff erentiable penalty function CROV , i that evaluates the mini-mum weight-sum of sets of neighbouring strings S within can-didate safe-space regions scanned around the string. This min-imum value is multiplied by wi to penalise configurations that violate the clearance requirement: 

CROV , i = wi ·

X 

> k∈min( S)

wk (40) In each optimisation iteration, 36 equally spaced angular checks are performed around each string, resulting in constraint evaluations across all 1000 candidate positions. Figure 27 shows the base 1000-string geometry and the corresponding ROV penalty per string for uniformly weighted strings. Apenalty value of zero corresponds to ROV-compliant placement. 1000 500 0 500 1000     

> X (m)
> 1000
> 500
> 0
> 500
> 1000
> Y (m)
> ROV
> 02468
> ROV Penalty
> Figure 27: Top-down view of the 1000-string base of candidate P-ONE ar-rays /strings. The strings are colours of string show how much they violate the ROV safe-space constraint for deployment (sketch for scale in the bottom left). Clearly, strings that lie at the perimeter of the base are already not in violation of the constraint.

36 Figure 28: Top-down views of snapshots of iterations of geometries during optimization, similar to Fig. 27 and also coloured by the same scale of ROV safe-space penalty. Faded dots represent strings with low weights (inactive). Each row is a separate geometry optimization for 6 separate random weight-initializations. Starting from the 0th iteration, each consecutive column is 100 iterations later until the 1000th iteration. 

We train six independent geometries from random weight initialisations using the ADAM optimiser with a learning rate of 0.1 over 1000 epochs. Figure 28 illustrates intermediate op-timisation stages for the resulting geometries, which converge to approximately 70 active strings in each case. Since the ROV penalty is naturally smallest near the boundary of the base ge-ometry, optimal solutions tend to form a perimeter of active strings near the 1 km radial limit. Within this perimeter, distinct ROV-compliant string clusters emerge, shaped by asymmetries introduced through random initial weights. The emergence of multiple, distinct geometries that equally satisfy engineering constraints demonstrates the viability of dif-ferentiable co-design approaches for generating diverse feasible solutions. This capability is particularly relevant for construct-ing Pareto fronts in multi-objective neutrino detector optimisa-tion. Future work could explore adaptive constraint-weighting strategies such as the one in Ref. (140), as well as fully genera-tive models for constrained geometry synthesis. 

3.6. A ground array for high-energy tau neutrino detection 

An astrophysics use case that shares a number of similari-ties with the SWGO optimization problem discussed in Sec. 3.3 above is the one of the TAMBO (Tau Air-Shower Mountain-Based Observatory) experiment. The idea of this experiment is to exploit the opaqueness of matter to ultra-high-energy neutri-nos, combined with the peculiar topography of a wide U-shaped valley in the Peruvian Andes. TAMBO will search for a signal produced when an Earth-skimming tau neutrino interacts with the rock of the mountain on one side of the valley by means of the charged-current interaction. The resulting tau lepton de-cays, producing a shower of secondary particles that can be detected by instrumenting the other side of the valley with a large number of scintillation planes. Due to the screening e ff ect of the target mountain on cosmic-ray backgrounds, the layout guarantees low backgrounds and thus high discovery potential. The framework supports both an idealized straight-walled val-ley geometry and a realistic terrain mesh of the Colca Valley, the nominal deployment site, derived from geographic data; valida-tion studies show good agreement with the e ff ective areas com-puted in the original TAMBO proposal, with peak sensitivity in the design-target range of 1–100 PeV. One point of contact with the SWGO optimization problem is the general question we need to answer: where do we place each of a large number of detection units, so that together they enable the most precise reconstruction of intercepted show-ers? Given the large number of detection units, gradient-based methods are appropriate. As in the SWGO case, the simula-tion of atmospheric showers—for this case, generated by any one of the several possible decay final states of the tau lep-ton, rather than single gamma rays—is highly stochastic, so a gradient-based optimization scheme requires a suitable dif-ferentiable surrogate. This can be produced with a di ff usion model trained to reproduce the three-dimensional fluxes and ar-rival times of secondary particles on the detectors, as simulated with CORSIKA (141) for di ff erent values of incident neutrino energy and angle. Triggering schemes can also be devised in a manner analogous to those discussed for SWGO, and a similar cost model could be developed. Two features make the TAMBO optimization problem richer than the SWGO one. The first is the directionality of back-grounds: the cosmic-ray flux reaching the detector depends non-trivially on the variable thickness of the target mountain 37 1. Initial detector layout          

> (place N detectors, whose coordinates
> are optimizable nn.Paramters)
> 2. Pre -train Reconstruction NN
> (200k primary events)
> 3. Randomly sample shower paramters
> (𝐸 ,𝜃 ,𝜑 )
> 4a. Diffusion model
> (3D particle shower)
> 4b. Bbox scaler
> (denormalize
> coordinates)
> 5. Compute detector counts and times
> (calcuate energy and arival time)
> 6. Reconstruction NN (Forward pass)
> (use detector information to estimate 𝐸 ,𝜃 ,𝜑 )
> 7. Compute utility function:
> Reconstructability (𝑈 𝑃𝑅 ), Energy resolution (𝑈 𝐸 ),
> Angular resolution ( 𝑈 Θ)based on output and target
> 8. Update Detector Positions (Backpropagation)
> 9. Fine -tune Reconstruction NN
> (for fixed detector positions)
> Reconstruction
> Shower generation Detector positions
> Sampling
> Legend
> Optimization loop Figure 29: Flow chart outlining the main stages of the optimisation of the array for high-energy tau neutrino detection.

along di ff erent lines of sight, so the background rate is a func-tion of both the detector position and the viewing direction. The second is that the detection surface is intrinsically three-dimensional—detector units must be positioned on the flank of a mountain rather than on a flat plane—and the complex-ity of deployment varies significantly with the local steepness of the terrain, directly a ff ecting construction and maintenance costs. Importantly, these topographic e ff ects couple to one an-other: the same mountain geometry that screens cosmic-ray backgrounds also constrains the set of feasible detector posi-tions. Several di ff usion models are trained on between 100k and 600k particle showers to generate the 3D particle distribution from the parameters of a primary event. The selection of the best performing model is in progress. The optimization pipeline leverages on this di ff usion model to generate a set of particles showers for randomly sampled primary event parameters (di-rection, energy and type of primary particle). The distribution is then scaled from the 32x32x24 output coordinates of the dif-fusion model to global coordinates using a Feedforward Neu-ral Network (FNN). This two-part architecture is selected such that it retains a high resolution for the shower, while being able to generate showers within a wide range of global coordinates. The output of the di ff usion model is then used to train a Recon-struction NN, which reconstructs the primary particle param-eters from the 3D shower distribution. A utility is computed on the ability of the Reconstruction NN to recreate the primary particle parameters. The main parts of the optimization process are outlined in Fig. 29. A global utility function for TAMBO has not yet been fully defined, as the experiment plans to both search for evidence of tau neutrinos independently and provide candidate source posi-tions to IceCube and other experiments, which may use this in-formation to cut down backgrounds to a manageable level. The utility will depend strongly on a triggering and reconstruction strategy that includes the e ff ective treatment of backgrounds— which depend on direction as well as on layout—with associ-ated tunable software parameters. Cost components a ff ect both online data acquisition and local access to energy, and comput-ing power, and have to be modulated e ff ectively in conjunction with the cost of the detector hardware. The current plan is that the utility function will be implemented as a two-stage model: the first stage will be a NN trained to convert secondary parti-cle observations to primary particle features; the reconstruction accuracy of those features will be combined with the detector position in the calculation of the final utility score. The sepa-rate stages of the optimization pipeline can be seen in Fig. 29. The current form of the utility function – considering recon-structability of the tau particle, which triggered the particle 38 shower – is: 

UPR (r) =

sX

> i

ri (41) 

UE ( ˆ E, E, r) =

X

> i

ri

( ˆ Ei − Ei)2 + ϵE

ϵE = 0.01 (42) 

UΘ(ˆ θ, θ, r) =

X

> i

ri

(ˆ θi − θi)2 + ϵΘ

ϵΘ = 10 −5 (43) 

U = 10 −2 UΘ(ˆ θ, θ, r) + UE ( ˆ E, E, r) + UPR (r)

√ρ , (44) where ri is the reconstructability score for event i, ρ is the shower core density, and ˆ · are the outputs of the Reconstruc-tion NN. The utility function is based on prior work (142). An alternative formulation is based on current work by the TAMBO collaboration, where the shower direction and core are reconstructed based on the distribution and arrival time of sec-ondary particles. This is done through likelihood maximization using a set of probabilistic distributions for the time of arrival of each particle and number of hits per detector. The utility then depends on the angle between the original and reconstructed shower. This analytical approach enables better explainability of the the optimization gradients. In summary, the TAMBO experiment optimization consti-tutes a rich and complex problem, which involves both con-tinuous (three-dimensional detector positions, voids in instru-mented regions) and discrete parameters (number of detectors, number of triggering stations, reconstruction model hyperpa-rameters), suggesting a hybrid evolutionary /gradient-based ex-ploration strategy similar to the one described in Sec. 3.3. The availability of a full-chain Monte Carlo framework provides the foundation on which the di ff erentiable surrogates required by such an optimization scheme can be built. A co-design ap-proach in any case appears necessary to guarantee convergence to truly optimal solutions, provided that the experiment is capa-ble of defining in a precise way its utility function. 

3.7. Co-design of a Dynamic Collimation System for Spot Scanning Proton Therapy via Di ff erentiable Optimization 

External Beam Radiotherapy (EBRT) is one of the most com-mon cancer treatment modalities. Within this field, proton ther-apy exploits the Bragg peak depth-dose characteristic to im-prove the sparing of Organs At Risk (OARs). To further refine dose delivery, Dynamic Collimation Systems (DCS), such as the discrete spot scanning system proposed by Hyer et al. (143), have been introduced to sharpen the lateral beam penumbra us-ing trimmer bars. Standard Treatment Planning Optimization (TPO) software determines beam parameters, such as spot fluences and colli-mator positions, to deliver a dose distribution compliant with the medical prescription. In this proof of concept, we propose a hardware-software co-design framework based on di ff eren-tiable programming. Adapted from a pipeline originally de-veloped for TPO (144), this method allows for the concurrent optimization of treatment parameters and hardware geometry, specifically the thickness of collimators and energy degraders. We employ a Deep Learning (DL) model as a di ff erentiable surrogate for Monte Carlo simulations. By leveraging the dif-ferentiability of the surrogate, we optimize both hardware and software variables using gradient-based algorithms. Finally, we demonstrate the ability to incorporate hardware-related radio-protection constraints into the optimization loop, such as the minimization of secondary neutron production. Reducing this secondary dose contribution can be particularly relevant for specific patient cohorts, such as pregnant women, due to the high radiosensitivity of the fetus (145, 146). 

3.7.1. System Geometry and Monte Carlo Simulations 

The system geometry, schematically illustrated in Fig. 30, is based on the design proposed by Hyer et al. (143). The beam source is modeled as a 3 × 3 matrix of proton pencil beams with a mean energy of 125 MeV, an energy spread σE = 1 MeV, and a spatial spread σpos = 0.5 cm. The beam line comprises a Beryllium (Be) energy degrader with a 10 cm × 10 cm cross-section and variable thickness. Downstream of the degrader, two pairs of Nickel (Ni) trimmer bars (10 cm × 3 cm, variable thickness) act as X and Y collimators. The beam enters a 40 cm cubic water phantom where the energy deposition occurs. Monte Carlo (MC) simulations were performed using the aforementioned G eant 4 toolkit, which is regularly bench-marked, including for medical applications (147, 148). A train-ing dataset of 1 .5 · 10 4 examples was generated. Each example consists of a simulation of a single central pencil beam with 3 · 10 4 primary protons. For each simulation, four input param-eters were sampled from uniform distributions: 

• Collimator thickness: tcoll ∈ [1 , 3] cm. 

• Degrader thickness: tdeg ∈ [3 , 5]cm. 

• Transverse aperture positions: The center of the aperture defined by the X and Y collimator pairs was shifted in the range [ −3.3, +3.3] cm, while maintaining a fixed aperture opening of 3 .6 cm. The simulation output consists of the volumetric dose dis-tribution recorded in a cylindrical mesh aligned with the beam axis. The scoring volume has a radius of 3 cm and a height of 8 cm starting from the phantom surface, discretized into 40 × 30 × 15 voxels along the z (depth), r (radius), and θ (az-imuth) coordinates, respectively. Additionally, the total sec-ondary neutron yield is scored within both the Beryllium de-grader and the Nickel collimators. It is worth noting that a complete and accurate simulation of the dose deposited by sec-ondary neutrons within the phantom is computationally de-manding and lies beyond the scope of this work. However, since the patient neutron dose is e ff ectively proportional to the production rate, we adopted the total neutron yield in the hard-ware components as a proxy metric for minimization. 39 Figure 30: Schematic of the DCS geometry including the Beryllium degrader, Nickel collimators, and the water phantom. 

3.7.2. Di ff erentiable Surrogate Model 

The surrogate model consists of two distinct neural networks sharing the same input vector, defined by the four simulation parameters ( tcoll , tdeg , ∆x, ∆y). The first component is a dose engine designed to predict the volumetric dose distribution within the water phantom. This network is based on the Recursive Nearest Neighbours Graph U-Net (ReNN GU-Net) architecture, previously validated for proton (149) and electron beam therapy (150). The model employs a U-Net structure based on Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to process data structured on a cylindrical mesh. It is composed by an Encoder, which processes density related in-formation, and an Embedder, dedicated to beam setup, whose output are merged and passed to a Decoder which compute the dose distribution. The architecture was adapted for this appli-cation: the Embedder module, originally designed to process beam energy, now encodes the hardware configuration and col-limator shifts. The latent features from the Encoder and the Em-bedder are concatenated and processed by a block of three con-volutional layers before being passed to the decoder. The net-work treats the cylindrical voxel grid as a graph, where nodes represent voxels and edges connect nearest neighbors, learning edge weights to capture spatial dependencies in energy deposi-tion. The second component is a lightweight Multi-Layer Percep-tron (MLP) tasked with predicting the secondary neutron yield in both the collimators and the degrader. The MLP consists of a single hidden layer with 128 nodes. Both networks were trained simultaneously using a com-bined objective function defined as the sum of the dose Binary Cross-Entropy (BCE) loss and the neutron Mean Squared Error (MSE). Within the neutron loss component, a weighting factor of 10 was applied to the collimator yield relative to the degrader yield to prioritize accuracy for the components closest to the pa-tient. A limited hyperparameter optimization was performed, fo-cusing on the learning rate, the number of convolutional layers following the Encoder-Embedder merging, and the number of hidden nodes in the neutron MLP. This process yielded the se-lected configuration described above. Training was performed on an NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU and lasted approximately 3.5 hours, using a learning rate of 5 ×10 −3

with a ReduceLROnPlateau scheduler (patience of 20 epochs). The resulting dose engine achieves a relative error below 3% across the region of interest. Regarding secondary particle pro-duction, the MLP predicts the Beryllium neutron yield with a mean relative error of 0.5%, while the yield from the Nickel collimators is estimated with an error of 3%. These metrics confirm the surrogate’s suitability for the subsequent optimiza-tion tasks. 

3.7.3. Optimization Strategy 

The optimization methodology adheres to the framework es-tablished in Arsini et al. (144), to which the reader is referred for comprehensive architectural details. In this implementation, the di ff erentiable dose engine is queried in batches of N = 9pencil beams. A regridding algorithm maps the individual cylindrical outputs onto a shared Cartesian grid of 51 × 51 × 51 voxels (10 .2 × 10 .2 × 10 .2 cm) representing the water phantom. The optimization problem targets a total of 17 free parame-ters, divided into two categories: 1. Global Field Parameters (8): Beryllium and Nickel thicknesses, grid pitch, four independent collimator jaw positions, and global fluence. 2. Pencil Beam Parameters (9): Individual ∆-fluences for each spot. Regarding collimation, we relax the fixed-gap constraint used in MC training. Each peripheral pencil beam is assumed to interact only with its proximal collimator jaw among the two on the same axis, while the central spot is treated as uncolli-mated. Variables are normalized for stability: spatial shifts are bounded to [ −1, 1], thicknesses and grid pitch to [0 , 1], and flu-ences are parameterized in log-space. We employ a hybrid recursive strategy alternating between global exploration and local refinement: 

• CMA-ES (151) (1800 iterations): Optimization is re-stricted to the 8 global field parameters to navigate the non-convex landscape. 

• Adam (152) (1000 iterations): Optimization is performed on all 17 parameters (field and pencil beams) to fine-tune the solution using gradient information. The process is iterative. If a combined CMA-Adam cycle yields a lower loss than the previous best solution, the updated parameters are retained for the next loop. However, if the cycle fails to improve the result, the optimization reverts to the previ-ous best configuration. Crucially, upon such a failure, the CMA exploration stage is disabled for all subsequent loops, and the 40 optimization proceeds exclusively with the Adam optimizer to ensure convergence within the identified basin of attraction. The optimization targets a 3 × 3 pencil beam field designed to treat a Planning Target Volume (PTV) defined as rectangular region of 1 × 1 × 11 voxels (2 .6 × 2.6 × 0.2 cm). For this proof of concept, the prescription dose is normalized to unity ( Dpre =

1). All voxels external to the PTV are collectively defined as a single Organ At Risk (OAR). The process is guided by a composite loss function L =

Ldose + λLneutron , where λ acts as a regularization parameter. The dosimetric component Ldose comprises five terms: 1. A voxel-wise Mean Squared Error (MSE) on the PTV to enforce the unitary prescription Dpre .2. A normalized MSE on the OAR voxels to minimize radia-tion spill-out. 3. A coverage penalty ReLU( Dpre − D95% )2, ensuring that 95% of the target receives at least the prescribed dose. 4. A hotspot penalty ReLU( DPT V max − 1.05 Dpre )2, constraining the maximum target dose within 105%. 5. An OAR safety constraint ReLU( DOAR max − 0.8Dpre )2, limit-ing the maximum dose to the surrounding tissue. The hardware-specific penalty is defined as Lneutron = N2 

> Be

+

100 · N2

> Coll

. Here, NBe and NColl represent the predicted neu-tron yields from the Beryllium degrader and Nickel collima-tors, respectively. To ensure numerical stability, both values are normalized to the range [0 , 1] using the minimum and maxi-mum neutron yields observed for the Beryllium degrader. This common scaling basis is adopted because the neutron produc-tion in the degrader is approximately one order of magnitude higher than in the collimators. The weighting factor of 100 is then explicitly applied to the collimator term to prioritize the reduction of neutrons generated at the nozzle’s distal end. Unlike upstream degrader interactions, which can be shielded, collimator-produced neutrons are generated in close proximity to the patient and contribute directly to the integral dose. 

3.7.4. Results 

To demonstrate the capabilities and flexibility of the pro-posed co-design framework, we present three optimization sce-narios. These examples illustrate how the optimizer adapts both hardware geometry and treatment parameters to satisfy varying clinical priorities, governed by the regularization parameter λ:

• Plan A (Baseline, λ = 0): A purely dosimetric optimiza-tion where neutron production is ignored. This serves as the reference for best achievable target coverage. 

• Plan B (Neutron-Averse, λ = 0.1): A scenario with a severe penalty on secondary particle production, testing the system’s behavior under extreme constraints. 

• Plan C (Balanced, λ = 10 −4): An optimized trade-o ff 

incorporating the specific collimator weighting described in Sec. 2.1.4, aiming to minimize local activation without compromising target coverage.  

> (a) Plan A Dose (b) Plan C Dose
> Figure 31: 2D Transverse dose distributions for Plan A (dose-only) and Plan C (balanced).

Table 4 summarizes the quantitative metrics for the three sce-narios. Plan A achieves a highly conformal dose distribution (D95 ≈ 94%) and sharp field edges (Fig. 31a), but results in the highest neutron yield from the collimators (0 .017). Plan B demonstrates the physical consistency of the sur-rogate model through a failure mode. Driven by the high penalty on material interaction, the optimizer maximally thins the Beryllium degrader and fully retracts the collimators. As a physical consequence, the beam energy is insu ffi ciently de-graded, causing the Bragg peak to overshoot the PTV and land in the distal OAR (Fig. 33). While this plan is clinically invalid (D95 = 37 .5%), it confirms that the gradient-based optimization correctly identifies the causal link between degrader thickness and beam range. Plan C represents the successful application of the co-design strategy. By utilizing a balanced penalty, the optimizer adopts a dual strategy: it retracts the collimator jaws to minimize direct beam interaction—thereby reducing secondary radiation—and compensates for the resulting loss in penumbra sharpness by decreasing the pencil beam spacing (grid pitch) compared to Plan A. Quantitatively, this trade-o ff is highly e ff ective: the collimator neutron yield drops by approximately one order of magnitude (0 .017 → 0.0020) relative to the baseline. Although this configuration results in slightly inferior dosimetric cover-age compared to the unconstrained scenario (Target D95 de-creases from 94 .0% to 93 .6%), the plan remains robust and clinically acceptable. 

> Table 4: Comparison of optimization metrics for Plans A, B, and C. Target Dose normalized to prescription (1.0).

Metric Plan A Plan B Plan C 

Neutron Yield (Be) 0.099 0.073 0.099 Neutron Yield (Coll) 0.017 0.0009 0.0020 Target D95 0.940 0.375 0.936 Target Mean 0.988 0.425 0.985 Target Max 1.058 0.502 1.058 OAR 1 D1 0.436 0.506 0.447 OAR 1 Max 0.824 1.188 0.852 41 (a) Plan A Setup (b) Plan C Setup 

> Figure 32: Visualization of collimator apertures (grey) and pencil beam posi-tions (colored dots) relative to the tumor (red square).
> Figure 33: 1D Dose profile along Z for Plan B. The Bragg peak (blue line) falls outside the PTV (shaded area).
> Figure 34: 1D Dose profile along Z for Plan C. The Bragg peak is correctly positioned within the PTV.

3.7.5. Discussion and Conclusion 

This study presents a proof of concept for a hardware-software co-design framework in proton therapy. While stan-dard Treatment Planning Optimization (TPO) typically consid-ers the nozzle geometry as a fixed constraint, our approach leverages di ff erentiable programming to concurrently optimize both the treatment planning variables and the hardware config-uration. The results demonstrate the system’s ability to adapt to vary-ing clinical priorities. Specifically, the introduction of a penalty term for secondary neutron production allowed the optimizer to explore innovative trade-o ff s. This capability is particu-larly relevant for specific patient demographics, such as preg-nant women, where minimizing the integral dose contribu-tion from secondary radiation is a critical safety requirement. As observed in the balanced optimization scenario, the sys-tem autonomously compensated for the retraction of collimator jaws—necessary to limit neutron generation—by tightening the pencil beam spacing, thus preserving target coverage. Current limitations of this work include the validation in a homogeneous water phantom and the specific adoption of the dynamic collimation geometry proposed by Hyer et al. (143). However, the underlying di ff erentiable modeling approach is generalizable and can be extended to more complex delivery systems or patient-specific geometries. From a computational perspective, the optimization process currently requires approximately 10 minutes on a single GPU. It should be noted that the code is not yet optimized for perfor-mance, and the stopping criteria for the hybrid strategy require further refinement. These aspects, while outside the scope of this proof of concept, will be the focus of future research aimed at scaling the framework to realistic clinical cases based on pa-tient CT data. 

3.8. Gravitational waves 

Gravitational-wave (GW) detectors aim to measure ex-tremely small distortions of spacetime caused by passing grav-itational waves. Astrophysical waves are emitted by systems such as merging black holes and neutron stars (153, 154), while cosmological waves are expected to form a stochastic back-ground originating from the early Universe (155). When a GW reaches an interferometric detector, it produces a characteristic change in the interference pattern of the laser beams by stretch-ing one arm and compressing the other. The size of this e ff ect is described by the strain h = δL/L, typically of order 10 −21 ,far smaller than the dimensions of an atomic nucleus. Given this extraordinary scale, GW detectors must achieve sensitivity su ffi cient to distinguish actual GW signals from a vast array of instrumental and environmental noise sources. Ground-based instruments like the LIGO-Virgo detector use kilometre-scale laser interferometers to measure variations in the distance between suspended mirrors (156, 157), while the future space mission LISA will measure similar varia-tions across millions of kilometres between freely flying space-craft (158). Extracting reliable signals requires both advanced optical and mechanical systems and equally sophisticated data analysis methods that model the noise, reconstruct the signals, and estimate the astrophysical properties of each event (159). 

3.8.1. Multi-band gravitational-wave detectors 

Because the GW signals are faint and the noise environment is complex, detectors exhibit a stronger form of hardware– software co-design than many other scientific instruments. 42 Their scientific performance depends on tight coupling between the physical design of the detector and the analysis pipelines that process the data. The measurement quality depends di-rectly on the analysis methods, while the analysis performance is constrained by how the hardware is engineered. Examples from both space-based and ground-based detectors illustrate this interdependence clearly. GW detectors are primarily distinguished by the range of frequencies to which they are most sensitive. Ground-based interferometers such as LIGO and Virgo operate in the ∼ 10– 10 3 Hz band, allowing them to detect the mergers of stellar-mass black holes and neutron stars (160). Space-based detec-tors like LISA will probe much lower frequencies, from ∼ 10 −4

to 10 −1 Hz, making them suitable for observing massive black-hole binaries and compact galactic binaries with long orbital pe-riods (158, 161). Even lower frequencies, down to ∼ 10 −9 Hz, are monitored by pulsar-timing arrays, which are sensitive to supermassive black-hole binaries and a possible cosmological background (162, 163). 

3.8.2. Gravitational-wave signals and detection methods 

GW signals are so weak that they are typically buried beneath noise that is many orders of magnitude larger than the signal itself. The signals have characteristic time-frequency patterns determined by the dynamics of the source, such as the chirping waveform produced by inspiraling compact binaries (164). De-tecting these signals requires accurate theoretical models (tem-plates), which are generated using both analytical and numeri-cal techniques (165, 166). In the traditional approach of matched filtering, the ob-served data are cross-correlated against these templates to identify events whose patterns align with the expected signal shape (167). Noise sources, such as seismic motion, thermal vibrations, or quantum fluctuations, are reduced using a com-bination of hardware design and dedicated subtraction meth-ods (168). After a candidate signal is identified, further analysis estimates the source properties by comparing the data with the-oretical templates using Bayesian inference techniques (159). 

3.8.3. Co-design in gravitational-wave detection 

A first case of co-design in GW detection comes from LISA. The mission relies on a specialised method of data processing known as Time-Delay Interferometry (TDI) that removes large fluctuations in the laser frequency by combining delayed mea-surements along di ff erent optical paths (169, 170). This tech-nique sets strict requirements on how the spacecraft move, how clocks are synchronised, and how the laser links are arranged. Because the cancellation only works when these conditions are met, the analysis method and the hardware configuration must be designed and validated together. In practice, end-to-end sim-ulations of the spacecraft motion, timing errors, optical perfor-mance, and reconstruction accuracy are run to find combina-tions that keep the residual noise below the required level (171). A second example is the use of squeezed light in LIGO and Virgo (172, 173). This technique reduces quantum noise at high frequencies by redistributing the quantum fluctuations in the phase and amplitude of the light. However, implementing squeezed light changes the statistical properties of the noise, in-troduces new couplings between optical subsystems, and mod-ifies the calibration behaviour. To benefit from the hardware upgrade, the analysis pipelines had to be adapted to the new noise characteristics and to the increased sensitivity to align-ment and phase-control errors. Simulations of quantum noise, calibration stability, and signal recovery were used to tune the squeezing level, control loops, and optical layout (174). A related co-design problem appears in future underground detectors such as the Einstein Telescope (175, 176). Fluctu-ations in ground and air density cannot be shielded and must be cancelled by combining environmental measurements with subtraction algorithms (177, 178). The performance of these algorithms depends on how well the sensor network samples the seismic and atmospheric fields, which in turn depends on the cavern layout and the allowed construction geometry. Co-design therefore requires joint simulations of underground seis-mic fields, sensor placement strategies, and subtraction algo-rithms to identify configurations that achieve su ffi cient noise reduction. In next-generation detectors, optimal sensitivity requires tun-ing both the detector components and the analysis pipelines together. Changes in mirror coatings, laser power, or optical geometry alter the noise spectrum, which a ff ects which filter-ing, calibration, or inference methods perform best (179). Con-straints also flow in the opposite direction: analysis require-ments such as low-latency detection or stable calibration over long timescales impose limits on sampling rates, actuator per-formance, and control-loop bandwidth (180). This creates a feedback loop between hardware choices and pipeline capabil-ities. Finally, environmental sensors used to identify and clas-sify non-astrophysical disturbances must be developed together with the analysis methods that rely on them (181). The perfor-mance of glitch-identification pipelines depends on what sen-sors exist, but installing sensors that the analysis cannot exploit accomplishes little. Data-driven studies of noise transients, sensor correlations, and classification accuracy help determine both which sensors are needed and how the pipelines should use them (182, 183). Together, these examples show that GW detectors are not simply built and then analysed: they are co-designed systems in which hardware and software must be optimised together us-ing simulations, noise models, and data-driven validation. This co-design approach is essential for achieving the sensitivity re-quired for future discoveries. 

3.8.4. Machine learning methods for co-design 

Machine learning enters co-design of GW detectors mainly through surrogate models that emulate expensive simulations related to both detector and waveform modelling (184, 185). Such surrogates learn the mapping from design parameters ( e.g. 

mirror coatings or seismic environment) to performance metrics (e.g. strain sensitivity or noise power spectrum) and then pro-vide predictions in milliseconds instead of minutes or hours. This makes it feasible to explore large coupled hardware– 43 10 1 10 2 10 3     

> Frequency [Hz]
> 10 24
> 10 23
> 10 22
> 10 21
> 10 20
> Amplitude Spectral Density  [1/  Hz  ]

Detector noise curves (components and total) at marked iterations 

> Total @ iteration 00
> Total @ iteration 14
> Total @ iteration 29
> Quantum Vacuum
> Seismic
> Newtonian
> Suspension Thermal
> Coating Brownian
> Coating Thermo-Optic
> Substrate Brownian
> Substrate Thermo-Elastic
> Residual Gas
> 3D parameter space

Trajectory in parameter space 

> LIGO default
> Constraint effect
> Arbitrary stop
> Stability Boundary Figure 35: Preliminary demonstration of gravitational wave detector optimization. The left plot is showing noise curves of our simulated LIGO-like detector and its individual components at di ff erent stages of the optimization. Note that increasing opacity on the noise curves implies further optimization. The right plot is showing an image of the optimizer’s trajectory through a reduced three-dimensional projection of the detector’s parameter space, illustrating convergence from the initial configuration (current LIGO setup) towards a plane parallel to the cavity stability boundary (green line) thanks to gradient projection, whose e ff ect starts being noticeable at iteration 14 (orange).

software design spaces and to compare many candidate con-figurations within a realistic computational budget (186). However, standard optimisation methods from machine learning, such as stochastic gradient descent, are generally not suitable for this case. This is because the design space is high-dimensional and irregular, and often not di ff erentiable. The latter means that small changes in configuration can cause abrupt changes in lock stability, control behaviour, or noise cou-pling, so reliable gradients are either unavailable or meaning-less. The objective functions are also multi-objective (sensitiv-ity, robustness, cost, operability) and constrained, with many hard engineering limits that do not fit easily into a smooth loss function (187). In addition, important noise sources are non-stationary and only partly modelled, so the mapping learned by a surrogate or assumed by an optimiser may drift over time. For these reasons, co-design studies usually combine sur-rogate models with global, gradient-free strategies such as Bayesian optimisation, evolutionary algorithms, and structured parameter scans, rather than relying on gradient-based training alone (188, 189). These methods are better suited to handle the complex, multi-modal landscapes characteristic of detector design problems and can systematically explore trade-o ff s be-tween competing objectives while respecting physical and en-gineering constraints. 

3.8.5. Practical case study 

In order to illustrate some of the concepts discussed so far in the realm of gravitational wave astronomy, a naive optimization of a generic LIGO-like interferometer is presented, adjusting only the length of its arms and the radius of curvature of its main mirrors. These three parameters are arguably some of the most important when designing a GW detector, and exhibit a physical constraint that would make this approach to optimization seem infeasible. Fabry-Perot cavities such as those in a ground-based inter-ferometer need to be kept stable 8 for long periods of time to operate correctly as a detector. To remain stable, such a cavity needs the stability factors, g1, for its Input Test Masses (ITMs) and g2 for its End Test Masses (ETMs), to satisfy the condition: 

g2 := g1g2(1 − g1g2) ≥ 0 ,



g1 := 1 − L/RIT M 

g2 := 1 − L/RET M , (45) which implies g1, g2 ∈ [0 , 1]. As the stability factors are them-selves functions of our three parameters, the border of our al-lowed region can be quite complex. Thankfully, the constraint reduces to: max( RIT M , RET M ) < L < RIT M +RET M , so the border can be constructed just by intersecting three planes. Because the sensitivity of an interferometer is proportional to its length, the optimization will only risk trespassing the upper length con-straint. If left unchecked, Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) will accelerate towards the limit and cross it, forcing the simu-lator to terminate the program. Many methods have been employed over the years to perform constrained optimizations (190, 191, 192). Penalty methods are the most ubiquitous (193, 194), as they are comparatively straightforward to implement. However, our need to remain close to the edge (ideally, at a constant distance of our choos-ing) pushed us to experiment with more geometry-inspired so-lutions. Since we aim to stop the optimization trajectory from ever crossing a known surface, and we have the gradient at our dis-

> 8In a physical configuration that ensures the laser beam cross-section will not grow indefinitely and therefore escape the mirror.

44 ITM [m] ETM [m] L [m] Iteration 0 2245.00 1934.00 3995.00 Iteration 14 2216.21 1902.35 4099.45 Iteration 20 2234.92 1919.93 4144.46 

> Table 5: Optimized parameter values at marked iterations (red, orange and yel-low on Fig. 35).

posal, we can project out the component of the gradient that is perpendicular to our surface once a predefined proximity threshold if met. If we introduce a smoothly increasing param-eter to control the amount of projection that is rejected, we get a smooth transition between our free and constrained regimes (right image of Fig. 35). ⃗

∇ f∥ =⃗ ∇ f − α(g)( ⃗ ∇ f ·⃗ n)⃗ n



α(gini ) = 0

α(glim ) = 1 . (46) In this study, α(g) = Lerp −1(gini , glim , tintrp = g) is chosen. No other costs were considered, so as to provide a clear example of gradient projection in action. That been said, a naive econom-ical cost-per-meter could be easily implemented for all three parameters. The optimization has been achieved by partially adapting the gwinc python library (195) to enable di ff erentiable calculation of detector noise curves. From them, we can construct a loss function to optimize. Since it is a simple demonstration, we chose the base 10 logarithm of the area under the combined noise (black line on the right plot of Fig. 35). Minimizing the area leads to better sensitivities, though constructing proper ob-jective functions will be an endeavour in its own right. With 30 iterations (initial + 29), detector range 9 was im-proved from the 185 Mpc of the Adv-LIGO design sensitivity to 236 Mpc (28% increase) by increasing the length by 200 m (only 5%) and tweaking the mirror radii slightly (Tab. 5). This was mainly achieved by working much closer to the stability edge, but since this distance is a hyperparameter of the opti-mization, it can be agreed upon with the teams responsible for detector operation early in the design process. 

3.9. Bridging the Hardware-Software Gap: A Case Study in Physical Generalization The Simulation Bottleneck. In the lifecycle of modern experi-ments, the simulation pipeline acts as the “digital twin” of the physical detector, consuming a significant fraction of the com-puting budget. Traditionally, modeling charge transport in sil-icon sensors relies on computationally intensive Monte Carlo methods ( e.g. , G eant 4). However, the transition to the High-Luminosity LHC (HL-LHC) introduces a crisis of scale: next-generation 4D sensors (such as 3D trench-type pixels) possess 

> 9Detector range is a more promising optimization target than the one used here, tough the algorithms used to calculate it are complex and have not yet been implemented in di ff erentiable programming paradigms. Still, we can obtain it from our optimized noise curves.

complex geometries that are prohibitively expensive to simu-late at the required volume. This creates a classic co-design tension: the hardware optimization (for precision) is decoupled from the software optimization (for throughput), creating a risk where advanced hardware designs become operationally unsus-tainable due to software latency. 

Bridging the Gap with ML Surrogates. To resolve this dead-lock, we deployed a co-design workflow to integrate Machine Learning (ML) surrogates directly into the experiment’s C ++ 

digitization framework. A key enabler was SOFIE (System for Optimized Fast Inference code Emit) (196), which tran-spiles models trained in flexible Python environments into dependency-free C ++ header files. This approach e ff ectively treats the neural network as a standard mathematical function, bridging the gap between scientific exploration and industrial-scale production constraints (latency and thread-safety). 

Validation as a Stress Test. A critical insight into the hardware-software coupling emerged during validation. We encountered a “Geometric Feature Gap” where a model, trained on 150 μmthick sensors, was inadvertently validated against a 200 μmhardware design. Initial residuals suggested a failure: a system-atic time o ff set of ∆t ≈ 0.66 ns (Fig. 36) and a broadened time distribution. However, a physics-driven analysis revealed that the surrogate had correctly generalized the underlying charge transport mechanism. By inverting the kinematic relationship for the thickness di ff erence ∆d = 50 μm, we derived the e ff ec-tive drift velocity implied by the model’s prediction: 

vdri f t = ∆d

∆t = 50 μm0.664 ns ≈ 0.75 × 10 7 cm /s . (47) This inferred value aligns consistently with the physical sat-uration velocity of electrons in silicon at room temperature (vsat ∼ 1.0 × 10 7 cm /s) under non-uniform fields. Further-more, the increased RMS width was found to correctly reflect the broader uniform distribution of drift times inherent to the thicker sensor volume, demonstrating that the model learned the implicit physics rather than memorizing the training geom-etry. 

Implications for Co-Design. This case study demonstrates that robustness requires parameterization. The observed mis-alignment acted as an unintentional stress test, proving that ML surrogates can bridge the gap between hardware parameters and software predictions if properly conditioned. To fully converge to the global maximum of the system’s utility function, future co-design workflows should explicitly parameterize hardware geometry as a conditioning feature for neural networks. This ensures that the software pipeline evolves synchronously with hardware design iterations, e ff ectively closing the loop between sensor engineering and experimental simulation. 

3.10. Automatic optimization of an Optical Parallel-Plate Avalanche Counter for neutron tomography 

Neutron tomography is a powerful non-destructive imaging technique that exploits the high penetration power of neutrons 45 (a) Time Resolution Shift           

> (b) Angular Response Comparison
> Figure 36: Manifestation of the “Geometric Feature Gap” acting as a probe for physical generalization. The ML surrogate, trained on 150 μm sensors, was val-idated against a 200 μm reference. (a) A systematic time o ff set of ∆t≈0.66 ns reflects the increased drift distance. (b) The divergence in angular response confirms the model is sensitive to path length changes ( L∝d/cos θ). These residuals indicate the model successfully extrapolated the underlying charge transport physics.

to visualize the internal structure of dense materials such as metals and alloys (197). This capability, which makes it com-plementary to other tomography techniques such as X-rays that are attenuated easily by high-Z materials, is particularly valu-able in fields including additive manufacturing, metallurgy, and border security. However, the large number of free parameters and their inter-dependent, non-trivial correlations make the global optimiza-tion of a full tomography setup a challenging task. As a first step toward this goal, this work presents a proof-of-concept study focused on a core component: the Optical Parallel-Plate Avalanche Counter (O-PPAC). The O-PPAC is a gaseous detector designed for heavy-ion tracking and imaging. Its design consists of two paral-lel squared electrodes separated by a 3 mm gap filled with low-pressure scintillating gas, with arrays of collimated photo-sensors positioned along the edges. The position of the im-pinging particle is reconstructed from the photon distributions detected along the gas gap. The characteristics of the photon distributions are determined by several design parameters such as the gas pressure and the collimator geometry. These variables have an impact on the scintillation light yield and the angular distribution of the pho-tons reaching the sensors, directly influencing the precision of the position reconstruction. To solve this optimization problem, a framework was imple-mented (198), based on a deep learning surrogate model trained to emulate both the detector response and the reconstruction process, enabling the minimization of an objective function through gradient-based optimization. The framework success-fully identifies a stable and optimal parameter configuration, yielding results compatible with traditional optimization tech-niques and validating the e ff ectiveness of the proposed method-ology. 

Detector concept and design parameters. The detector design, originally introduced by Cortesi et al. (199), consists of two par-allel metallized electrodes separated by a 3 mm gap filled with a scintillating gas, such as CF 4. When an ionizing particle tra-verses the active volume, it deposits energy by creating primary ionization electrons, which are subsequently multiplied in the gas through a Townsend avalanche driven by a uniform electric field established between the two plates. 

> Figure 37: Schematic representation of the operational principle of the Op-tical Parallel-Plate Avalanche Counter (O-PPAC). Image reproduced from Ref. (199).

The scintillation light emitted during the avalanche process is reflected by the metallized electrode foils and guided to-ward arrays of collimated photo-sensors. The collimation is critical for the precise localization of the impinging particles, as it constrains the detected photon distributions so that their peaks are more heavily weighted near the avalanche position (see Fig. 37). In this study, the optimization was focused on two opera-tional parameters: the scintillating gas pressure ( p) and the col-limator length ( L). While higher gas pressure increases the elec-troluminescence yield and improves signal statistics, the colli-46 mator length regulates the spatial spread of the light in each wall. A longer collimator improves localization but signifi-cantly reduces photon detection e ffi ciency. 

Position reconstruction. As suggested in Ref. (199), the recon-struction of avalanche coordinates ( ˆ x, ˆ y) is performed by com-puting the arithmetic mean between the light peaks recorded by each pair of opposing arrays weighted by the total number of detected photons and the dispersion of the distribution: ˆx = Px1 · Nx1 

σx1 

+ Px2 · Nx2 

σx2 

!

/ Nx1 

σx1 

+ Nx2 

σx2 

!

, (48) ˆy = Py1 · Ny1 

σy1 

+ Py2 · Ny2 

σy2 

!

/ Ny1 

σy1 

+ Ny2 

σy2 

!

, (49) where P is the mean of the distribution on each wall, N is the number of photons detected by the SiPM arrays, and σ repre-sents the standard deviation of each distribution. 0 10 20 30          

> # of SiPMs in the array
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> # photons
> N = 241
> = 16.32
> = 3.35
> 010 20 30
> # of SiPMs in the array
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> # photons
> N = 225
> = 16.64
> = 3.18
> PPAC
> X1
> X2
> Y1
> Y2
> 010 20 30
> # of SiPMs in the array
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> # photons
> N = 220
> = 16.68
> = 3.19
> 010 20 30
> # of SiPMs in the array
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> # photons
> N = 218
> = 16.59
> = 3.45

Figure 38: Illustration of the position reconstruction for a simulation event in-duced by a 5.5 MeV alpha particle. Image reproduced from Ref. (198). 

Surrogate Model. The surrogate model was implemented as fully connected neural network trained to predict the recon-structed position ( ˆ x, ˆy) from 4 input variables: detector config-uration ( p, L) and particle initial position ( x, y). The training dataset was generated using G eant 4 simulations of a 10 × 10 cm 2 O-PPAC. The simulation setup utilized 5.5 MeV alpha particles as the impinging species, with events dis-tributed over a central active area of x, y ∈ [−4, 4] cm. To char-acterize the detector response, a grid of configurations was sim-ulated for gas pressures p ∈ [10 , 50] Torr and collimator lengths 

L ∈ [5 , 50] mm. To ensure best performance, the network architecture and hyperparameters such as learning rate, number of layers and hidden units were optimized using Optuna (200). A de-tailed description of the neural network architecture, the dataset and the hyperparameter optimization strategy can be found in Ref. (198). 

Optimization. The optimization stage aims to minimize the po-sition reconstruction error by employing the surrogate model as a di ff erentiable emulator of the O-PPAC response. With this aim, the objective function is defined as the Mean Squared Error (MSE) between the true particle coordinates x and the positions 

ˆxpred predicted by the surrogate: 

L(p, L) = MS E (x − ˆxpred (p, L)) . (50) As illustrated in Fig. 39, the process begins with an initial configuration of design parameters and a batch of 10 5 random particle positions. These values are processed by the surrogate model to compute the loss, after which we employ the Adam optimiser (201) with a learning rate of 10 −3. This cycle is re-peated iteratively until the parameters and the loss stabilize. Optimization Loop  

> Volume
> Alpha Batch
> NN predicts
> reconstructed position
> Compute loss (MSE) Backpropagate Loss
> End
> Update detector
> parameters
> epoch ==
> n_epochs Yes
> No
> epoch = 0
> epoch+=1
> VolumeWrapper.fit(n_epochs)

Figure 39: Breakdown of the detector optimization loop, outlining the process of initializing and updating the parameters (p and L) based on the gradient of the loss function. Image reproduced from Ref. (198). 

Results and discussion. The robustness of the proposed opti-mization approach was evaluated by initializing the optimiza-tion loop from 400 di ff erent starting points in the ( p, L) pa-rameter space. Regardless of the initial condition, all trajec-tories successfully converged to a consistent optimal point at 

p ≈ 39 .03 Torr and L ≈ 15 .11 mm, as shown in Fig. 40. This uniform convergence demonstrates that the identified solution corresponds to a global minimum. Finally, the results obtained via di ff erentiable program-ming were compared with traditional methods to validate the approach. The optimal collimator length identified by the framework is consistent with the traditional optimization stud-ies (199), further supporting the robustness of the method. 47 (a) 

> (b)
> (c)
> Figure 40: Evolution of the (a) collimator length, (b) pressure, and (c) loss function throughout the optimization loop for a grid of initial configurations of pressure and collimator length. Image reproduced from Ref. (198)

Regarding the gas pressure, the optimal value was found to be relatively high within the specified range. While this can be partly attributed to the higher statistics observed at increased pressures, this result cannot be explained purely by photon yield, as that would suggest the optimal pressure should always be the maximum value allowed. We hypothesize that other fac-tors, potentially related to the physical behavior of the detector or intrinsic limitations of the simulation, may be influencing this specific result. In conclusion, this proof-of-concept study shows that di ff er-entiable programming combined with surrogate models can ef-fectively identify a stable global minimum in the case of the O-PPAC. Future studies will apply this methodology to optimize the full geometry of the neutron tomography system, with the O-PPAC as a central component. The goal is to jointly maximize detection e ffi ciency, spatial resolution, and cost-e ff ectiveness, finding the optimal balance between performance and eco-nomic viability for industrial applications. 

3.11. Muon scattering tomography scanners 

Muon tomography (also known as muography) is a non-invasive imaging technique that uses naturally occurring cosmic-ray muons to probe the internal structure of large or oth-erwise inaccessible objects (202, 203). Most of these muons, produced in the upper atmosphere, have energies on the order of GeV or higher, enabling them to traverse hundreds of me-ters of rock or dense materials before stopping. By placing tracking detectors around a volume of interest (VoI) and mea-suring the scattering or flux attenuation that muons undergo as they pass through the volume, one can reconstruct a density map of the interior. When a scattering angle is recorded, its distribution further provides information on the atomic com-position of the VoI. Applications of muon tomography range from volcano imaging and archeological surveys to monitoring industrial infrastructure and nuclear safeguards, o ff ering a pas-sive and cost-e ff ective alternative to more conventional imaging methods (204, 203). Designing eff ective muon tomography systems requires striking non-trivial trade-o ff s between performance, cost, and physical constraints. To address this issue, the T om Opt project introduced a comprehensive framework for end-to-end opti-mization of muon scattering tomography detectors (205). T o-

mOpt models the entire measurement pipeline, from the gener-ation of cosmic-ray muons and their scattering within the VoI to the detector response and final inference, as a fully di ff er-entiable chain. This approach allows for the application of gradient-based optimization techniques to simultaneously tune hardware parameters, such as the geometric configuration and spatial resolution of the tracking layers, alongside the recon-struction objectives. Recent studies have demonstrated T o-

mOpt ’s capacity to tailor detector designs for specific tasks, such as measuring the fill level in furnace ladles (205) and cargo scanning for border security (206, 207, 208), highlighting its ability to produce task-specialized detector designs rather than generic tracking systems. 48 In this Section we present three simplified case studies. First, we examine contrastive imaging using Bayesian optimization to jointly tune hardware geometry, inference hyperparameters, and exposure time. Second, we study anomaly detection in cargo scanning, where a hypothesis-testing loss is optimized within the di ff erentiable T om Opt framework to detect high-Z targets without full volumetric reconstruction. Finally, we ex-plore a civil engineering application using Bayesian optimiza-tion to co-design a muography system for the imaging of a re-inforced concrete pillar. 

3.11.1. Simultaneous optimisation of hardware, software, and exposure-time for contrastive imaging Overview. The goal of this particular investigation is to ex-plore, and demonstrate the potential of, simultaneous optimiza-tion of all aspects of muon-tomography-based imaging system: the detector-hardware, the inference software, and the way in which the system is used in application. In order to focus on the optimization potential, we take a simplified, general sce-nario that draws on the primary application of muon tomog-raphy systems: imaging inside a closed volume. The goal of the system is to produce an image in which various sub-volume regions are clearly identifiable. Two optimisation processes are considered: 

• Given a fixed cost, find the system that produces the best image – a single-objective optimisation 

• Given a minimal image quality, find the Pareto-optimal set of systems that minimize cost and imaging time – a con-strained multi-objective optimisation 

Simulation. All results in this Section are based on simulations of the physical processes. The MUTE (209, 210, 141, 211, 212) package is used to sample the initial energy and polar angles of the muons; their subsequent scattering through the passive volume follows the “PDG model" (213). 

The passive volume. In order to factor out noise, that would otherwise interfere with the main goal of this investigation, a single passive volume is used. This consists of a beryllium cube of 1 m side, centered at the origin. Inside the cube are three smaller cubes of 0.2 m sides, equally spaced along the x-axis at y = z = 0. These smaller cubes are modelled as being composed of aluminium, iron, and uranium. The outer beryl-lium casing has a comparatively high X0 compared to the inner metals, which allows for imaging of the inner structures by scat-tering angle measurement. Figure 41a details a cross-section of the passive volume layout. This passive volume naturally pro-vides high and low contrast parts. A decent scanning system should be able to distinguish between the inner cubes and the beryllium casing, but a very good system would be necessary to distinguish the inner cubes themselves. 

The detector system. The detector consists of several active panels, modelled as silicon pixel detector planes. These are kept centred at x = y = 0, but otherwise free to translate along the z-axis. Whilst the total sensitive area of the panels is fixed, this area may be distributed to each panel individually, and the numbers of panels above and below the passive volume can also vary: between two and four, inclusive, each above and below. Such a system already presents a non-trivial optimisation problem: 

• Increasing the distance between the detector panels al-lows for more precise muon-trajectory reconstruction, at the cost of a reduced number of muons whose trajectory passes through both panels; 

• Increasing the number of detector panels further allows for a trade-o ff between trajectory reconstruction precision, and helping ensuring that muons whose trajectories miss later detectors, are detected at least twice; however this comes at the cost of reducing each panel area; 

• Increasing size of the panels on the top increases the ex-posure to muons that pass through the detectors and the passive volume, at the cost of reduced detection of muons exiting the passive volume; 

• Conversely, larger panels below the passive volume can help to detect muons that undergo large angular scatters (indicative of low X0 material; 

• There may also be interaction with the reconstruction soft-ware, in which the tuning of the hardware can act as a filter to deliberately miss detection of muons that due to deficiencies in the software would otherwise spoil the re-sulting image. In total, there are 18 hardware parameters: 

• The Z position and areas assignments of up to 8 panels (16); 

• The number of panels above and below the passive volume (2). Whilst all detectors are assumed to record muons that pass through them, each detector has a fixed measurement e ffi ciency and spatial resolution. The former eventually feeds into a trajec-tory e ffi ciency, which collapses to zero if only one muon trajec-tory point is measured. Spatial resolution is modeled through a random jitter to the reconstructed position of the muon hit, which makes trajectory fitting more di ffi cult, unless multiple measurements (panels) are used to constrain the muon position. 

The imaging system. Producing an image follows a general pattern: 1. Detector hits are reconstructed to form incoming and out-going trajectories; 2. Trajectories are extrapolated inside the passive volume to identify the point of closest approach (PoCA); 3. The PoCAs and other information of the muons are used to compute localised measurements of the passive volume density, the value of which is monotonic to the X0 of the material; 49 4. These measurements together constitute the resulting im-age; a calibration may be applied. Optimisation of the imaging system (software) includes both the choice of algorithm used to move from PoCAs to localised density measurements, and the hyper-parameters of the algo-rithms. We consider three di ff erent algorithms which are de-liberately designed to have a shared set of hyper-parameters. Additionally, all algorithms localise the measurements within the passive volume by considering it to be discretised into a tetrahedral mesh. 

PoCA-S ingle – this algorithm only allows muons to con-tribute to the tetrahedron that contains its PoCA. After all PoCAs are localised, scattering angles, trajectory e ffi ciencies, muon momenta, and their associated uncertainties 10 are used to compute X0 predictions per tetrahedron via inversion of the PDG scattering model (213). Whilst this algorithm is very quick to run, and memory-light, it results in sparse predictions, unless muon exposure is high. 

PoCA-S pread – this algorithm follows the same approach as the P oCA-S ingle algorithm, except that muons can now con-tribute to multiple tetrahedra. It does so by using the uncertainty on the PoCA position to form a 3D Gaussian PDF. The integral of this PDF across a given tetrahedron is used as a weight re-flecting the probability that the muon scattered somewhere in-side it. Next, per-muon scattering angles are computed for every tetrahedron’s centroid, considering the detector-hit-centroids above and below the passive volume as start /end points. As before, the properties of the muons, their scatterings, and their measurements are used to invert the PDG model per tetrahe-dron. However, now each muon’s contribution to the aggrega-tions is weighted by the probability of scattering in each tetra-hedron. This algorithm is slow to compute and very memory-heavy, however it allows for dense measurements of the volume, re-ducing the number of muons that may be necessary to form a high-quality image. Additionally, it produces a stronger software-hardware coupling: precise measurements of muons result in muons contributing significantly to fewer tetrahedra, which provides an interesting trade-o ff between precise X0 mea-surements and smoothness of the surrounding measurements – it may be beneficial to aim for a less constrained measurement in order to actually increase the quality of the final image. 

PoCA-D ensity – this algorithm attempts to strike a bal-ance between the P oCA-S ingle and P oCA-S pread algorithms in terms of allowing a single muon to contribute to multiple tetrahedra, but without the large memory usage and computa-tion time incurred by P oCA-S pread . Crucially, it does not at-tempt to directly estimate the X0 of tetrahedra, but instead pro-duces a measurement that is expected to be monotonic to the 

X0. This measurement is based on the spatial density of PoCA 

> 10 The system used does not allow for momentum measurements; in this study the true muon momentum is used for inference, with no uncertainty. Momen-tum measurement is aimed to be included in future developments, which will further expand the parameterisation space.

points. Since muons are more likely to scatter in low-X0 re-gions, the PoCA density in those regions should be higher. Similar to P oCA-S pread , the uncertainty on the PoCA lo-cations is used to construct an integral per tetrahedron. The muons’ scattering angles, momenta, and measurement e ffi cien-cies are used to construct per-muon weights. The weighted av-erage of PoCA integrals per tetrahedron is then computed by aggregating over the muons. This set of PoCA masses is then divided by the tetrahedra volumes to produce a PoCA density, the inverse of which should be monotonic to the tetrahedra X0s. Similarly to P oCA-S pread , this algorithm can potentially ex-ploit hardware-driven uncertainties to produce higher-quality images, and so may benefit from simultaneous optimisation. The algorithms described above can function as they are, however not all muons may actually be beneficial to the image construction. To account for this possibility, software filters are added, controlled by optimisable hyper-parameters: 

• Minimum chord length – this is the minimum distance that muons must travel inside the tetrahedron that con-tains their PoCA, in order to be included in the image. If a PoCA is very close to the surface of a tetrahedron, it most likely scattered in a di ff erent tetrahedron; and the uncer-tainty on the X0 computation is likely to be high. This filter can be used to focus in on muons whose PoCA is well con-tained within a tetrahedron. This hyper-parameter used by all three algorithms, but only expected to be relevant when using P oCA-S ingle and P oCA-D ensity .

• Minimum and maximum momenta – these control a sim-ple window on the muon momentum, outside of which the muon is discarded. Low-momentum muons scatter more easily, and so may make it harder to distinguish di ff erences in X0. Vice versa , high-momentum muons do not scatter as much, again making it hard to distinguish X0 di ff erences. Tuning of these cuts allows the software to focus on the momentum range that is most beneficial. These parame-ters are used by all three algorithms. 

• Minimum scattering angle – this allows for muon selection based on the estimated amount of scattering they undergo. This parameter is expected to be closely tied with the mo-mentum window cut, and the detector panel positions. It is used by all three algorithms. 

• Minimum fractional tetrahedron integral – this parameter is only used by the P oCA-S pread and P oCA-D ensity al-gorithms. It allows the software to constrain the e ff ect that PoCAs have on far away tetrahedra by only allowing muons to contribute to a tetrahedron, if their PDF integral within the tetrahedron is above the minimum threshold. This is expected to be closely tied with the hardware pa-rameters, which mainly influence the uncertainty on the PoCA positions. In total, there are six software parameters: 

• The choice of inference method (1); 

• The hyperparameters of the three algorithms (5). 50 Image quality quantification. The goal of the system is to pro-duce an image in which each sub-volume region is as clearly identifiable as possible from each other. I.e. , we do not care what values the measurements of each region are in terms of ab-solute scale, only that they are di ff erent between sub-volumes and similar within the same sub-volume. In order to quantify this we use a contrastive utility function, detailed below. While above it was said that the we do not care about the absolute values of the measurements, since the utility func-tion will be based on absolute di ff erences in the measurements, we want to ensure that di ff erent systems still produce measure-ments of the same scale. Therefore we first calibrate all mea-surements using a global linear rescaling that is fit via mean-squared error minimisation between the measurements and the true X0 – this may be done in practice for the final system by calibrating it on a set of known volumes. Next, we compute the di ff erences in measurements for each combination of sub-volume pairs: 

δi j = μi − μ j

q

σ2 

> i

+ σ2 

> j

+ σ2

> n

, (51) where μi and σ2 

> i

are the mean and standard deviation of the measurements in sub-volume i. σ2 

> n

is the base level of ex-pected noise, which is estimated a priori , using repeated mea-surements of the same system, and checking how much the measurements naturally vary. This distance increases if the measurements in di ff erent sub-volumes become more di ff er-ent, however it decreases if the measurements within the same-volume become very noisy; it quantifies how well we can dis-tinguish sub-volumes i and j.To prevent the optimization from focusing on one specific pair at the expense of others, we compute a soft minimum of the set of distances: 

U = − 1

τ ln 

X

> i j

e−τδ i j 

 , (52) where τ is tuned a priori such that the second worst pair con-tributes at 5% the value of the worst. 

Single-objective optimisation. The goal of this optimisation is to find the system that can produce the best quality image, given a fixed exposure time (120 s) and a fixed total detector area (100 m 2). Bayesian Optimisation is used to maximise the con-trastive utility function described in Sec. 3.11.1 by simultane-ous optimisation of both the software and hardware parameters. The best resulting detector, detailed on the left in Fig. 43, achieves a metric score of just about 0.5. It uses two equally-sized and highly separated panels to measure incoming muons –a result unsurprisingly coincident with the optimal layout of the idealized strip tracker we found by analytic optimization in Sec. 3.1. Outgoing muons are measured using four panels. Two are placed very close together, near to the passive volume. Their combined measurements allow the detector to measure the po-sitions of outgoing muons very precisely, but not their angular trajectories. That task is accomplished by two further panels: the first is set at small spacing from the previous, presumably to 0.4 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4                 

> X (m)
> 0.4
> 0.2
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> Y (m)
> Predicted X0
> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> 0.30
> X0
> 0.4 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4
> X (m)
> 0.4
> 0.2
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> Y (m)
> True X0
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> 0.30
> 0.35
> X0
> (a) Single-objective optimisation (left), next to the true x0distribution of the passive vol-ume (right) 0.4 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4
> X (m)
> 0.4
> 0.2
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> Y (m)
> Predicted X0
> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> 0.30
> X0
> 0.4 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4
> X (m)
> 0.4
> 0.2
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> Y (m)
> True X0
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> 0.30
> 0.35
> X0
> (b) Medium exposure-time system resulting from the multi-objective optimisation (left), next to the true x0distribution of the passive volume (right).

Figure 41: Example images created by the optimised system for the two dif-ferent optimisation runs performed. The images are constructed by averaging over z in the region −0.2 < z ≤ 0.2, in order to focus on the inner cubes. The left-hand-side images are produced by using the optimised systems to infer the X0 of the materials. The right-hand-side images are the true distributions of materials. The surrounding material is beryllium, and inside it are three inner cubes, which from left to right are made from aluminium, lead, and uranium. 

catch muons with moderate angular scattering; the second is set at a very large vertical separation, presumably to o ff er very high angular precision on muons that only scatter slightly. The area of panels in the optimal configuration is approximately equal. For the software side, the optimal system employs the P oCA-Spread inference algorithm, with a moderate cut on the frac-tional tetrahedron integral of 0.3, which allows muons to con-tribute to tetrahedra the are relatively far away, but not in tetrahedra where it is unlikely that the most significant scat-ter took place. The window cut on the muon momentum is 2.4 GeV to 892 GeV. Given that the energy spectrum peaks at around 2 GeV to 3 GeV, this is potentially cutting out a large number of low-momentum muons, which undergo large-angle scattering especially in high-x0 materials. This suggests that the system realizes the need to filter out muons that carry high un-certainty on the PoCA and less information about the material they scattered in. The minimum chord length and minimum an-gular scattering were both set to their maximum upper values of 1 × 10 −5, suggesting that they are useful in filtering out muons, but should have been allowed to vary to even higher values. Figure 41a shows an example image created by the result-ing system. In spite of the low muon statistics employed in this data-poor exercise, the uranium area is clearly visible, and the low-x0 prediction region also extends back along the x-axis. The beryllium region is relatively smooth, although the inner cubes are blurred outside their true locations. 51 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 

> Exposure Time [s]
> 50
> 100
> 150
> 200
> Total Area [ m2]
> Non-Pareto Feasible Points
> Pareto Front
> Highlighted

Figure 42: The Pareto-optimal front resulting from the multi-objective optimi-sation. Total area is in units of m2. The two circled systems are the ones detailed in Fig. 43 (middle and right plots). Only points with image quality above 0.4 are shown. 

Multi-objective optimisation. Having explored the maximum performance for a fixed budget detector (in terms of surface area and exposure time), and the typical ranges of our utility func-tion, we can move to search for the set of detectors that achieve 

decent results, whilst minimising cost and exposure time. To do so, we introduce the total area of the detector and the exposure time as parameters to the optimiser, and attempt to minimise them, whilst ensuring the utility function exceeds a minimum value. This constrained, multi-objective optimisation should re-sult in a set of equally optimal systems: a Pareto-optimal front spanning exposure time and total area. In this case, due to the potentially higher increased exposure time and detector area, memory limitations preclude the use of the P oCA-S pread algo-rithm. Therefore only P oCA and P oCA-D ensity algorithms are considered for optimisation. A set of optimisers are used to explore the feasible space, and map out the rough location of the Pareto-optimal front: NSGA2 (214), NSGA3 (215), and UNSGA (216). Their explo-ration is the used to initialise a Bayesian optimisation designed to push the Pareto-optimal front further. The resulting front is shown in Fig. 42. In terms of software, all systems use P oCA, with a light cut on minimum muon momentum of around 0.5 GeV. Within these software settings, the hardware can shift between a large-size, low-exposure-time detector, and a smaller, higher-exposure-time system. Since moving to a higher exposure-time only allows the detector to be reduced in size by very little, we focus on the two circled detector configurations in Fig. 42. These are displayed in Fig. 43. In terms of layout, the two optimal solutions are quite simi-lar: three panels above, with a focus on measuring muon posi-tions at the top half of the incoming trajectory, and four panels below, with a focus on measuring the bottom half of the outgo-ing trajectory. The only real di ff erence is the size of the panels. Both detectors also show an intention to miss high-scattering muons, and instead focus on muons undergoing small scatter-2 0 2    

> X (m)
> 20
> 15
> 10
> 5
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> Z (m)
> SOO
> 202
> X (m)
> MOO:
> Low exposure time
> 202
> X (m)
> MOO:
> High-exposure time

Figure 43: Side-on layouts of the systems resulting from the optimisation stud-ies. The hashed box represents the passive volume, and the red /green boxes represent the detector panels. Left: single-objective optimisation: best result-ing detector. Middle and right: selected detectors from the Pareto-optimal set of systems discovered during multi-objective optimisation. The middle panel shows the larger, low exposure-time system, and the right panel shows the smaller, higher exposure-time system. 

ings, or passing straight through the passive volume. This be-comes evident when we examine the images produced by the system (Fig. 41b): the lighter metals are well isolated, how-ever the uranium section is di ffi cult to distinguish – those high-scattering muons that would be the most sensitive to lower x0

are missed by the detector. This indicates that either the mini-mum constraint on the image quality is too lenient, or that the utility function needs to also encourage also some ordering to the mean prediction within volume regions. 

Summary. In this investigation we demonstrated that simulta-neous optimisation of hardware, software, and application (ex-posure time) parameters was possible, and resulted in detection systems and software that make intuitive sense. This simultane-ous optimisation is particularly useful, since it allows for con-strained multi-objective optimisation of the system. This would 52 have been very challenging if hardware, software, and applica-tion were to be optimised separately: if the outer constrained optimiser were to act on optimising hardware, then each sam-ple’s measurement of the constraint would imply a full con-strained minimisation of the exposure time, in which each sam-ple would imply a full unconstrained maximisation of the image quality via the optimisation of the software parameters. Whilst possible, this three-tiered optimisation approach requires sig-nificantly more runtime than simultaneous optimisation. 

3.11.2. Hypothesis-testing loss for anomaly detection Overview. While the previous application focuses on imag-ing the substructure of a volume, a common case study in scattering-based muography involves determining the presence of a high-Z target within a specified VoI, which is indicative of anomalous or potentially hazardous materials. This approach is particularly relevant in cargo inspection applications, and is pursued as an alternative to performing a full three-dimensional reconstruction of the underlying material density map. Such 3D reconstructions typically rely on the PoCA inference, which es-timates the scattering location of the muon inside the VoI as a single point. Downstream voxelization of combined PoCA-derived spatial and angular deflection variables allows the in-ference of local radiation lengths. Although this PoCA-based reconstruction is simple and widely used, the resulting X0 esti-mates become unstable in low-statistics, highly anisotropic ge-ometries, and low-Z mediums, motivating task-driven alterna-tives that bypass full volumetric reconstruction. To avoid these issues, we instead pose the problem as a binary hypothesis test: 

• H0 : the VoI contains only background material; 

• H1 : the VoI contains an unknown high-Z target. The detector design is then optimized to maximize the sep-aration between these two hypotheses. We implement this as a Jensen–Shannon divergence (D JS )–based test, where TomOpt simulates two batches of events - one under H 0 and another under H 1 - and computes the D JS between the resulting PoCA scattering distributions. In this setup, D JS between the back-ground distribution and its mean reference defines the critical value that corresponds to a false-positive rate of 5%. D JS be-tween the signal distribution and the same mean background is then used to quantify the statistical power of the test. Di ff er-entiability is maintained throughout every stage of the test, en-suring that gradients propagate cleanly and enabling gradient-based optimization of all relevant parameters. 

Di ff erentiable Hypothesis Test Loss. Let Vsig and Vbkg denote the sets of signal and background volumes, respectively. Vol-umes Vbkg are defined as an aluminium block, and Vsig vol-umes include in addition a small uranium block situated on the floor of the block. Each volume generates a distribution of PoCA scattering events. We construct a kernel density es-timate (KDE) of the scattering distribution for each volume, with a learnable software smoothing parameter σsw controlling the KDE bandwidth. Small values of σsw produce sharp his-tograms that are highly sensitive to statistical fluctuations and noise, while large values yield smoother distributions that can blur fine details and reduce sensitivity to the presence of a tar-get. The average background scattering distribution is denoted as ¯S bkg . The similarity of each volume to the background is quan-tified using D JS , which can be expressed in terms of Kullback-Leibler divergence (D KL ): DJS 

 S V , ¯S bkg 

 = 12 DKL 

 S V || M + 12 DKL 

  ¯S bkg || M ,

M = 12

 S V + ¯S bkg 

 ,

(53) where S V is the KDE of the scattering distribution correspond-ing to volume V.A di ff erentiable threshold Tc is computed from the back-ground D JS distribution at significance level α, and the detection of a signal volume is defined with a sigmoid threshold: ˆyi = 11 + exp h − τdetect 

 DJS (S sig  

> Vi

, ¯S bkg ) − Tc

i , (54) where τdetect controls the sharpness of the transition. The overall detection power, denoted Π, is 

Π = 1

Nsig 

> Nsig

X

> i=1

ˆyi . (55) The di ff erentiable loss function optimized in our framework is 

L(σhw , σ sw ) = 1 − Π + λ σ hw , (56) where the hardware angular resolution σhw is included to ac-count for the finite detector resolution in the optimization. This angular resolution is computed via error propagation from the panel longitudinal positions zi (hardware free parameters) and their spatial resolutions σx using a weighted variance: 

σhw =

s

1

Pi wi(zi − ¯z)2 , wi = 1

σ2 

> x

+ ϵ , ¯z =

Pi wizi

Pi wi

, (57) where ϵ > 0 is a small constant introduced to ensure numerical stability. 

Optimization loop. At each optimization epoch, three batches, each consisting of 50 background and 50 signal passive vol-umes, are scanned. PoCA reconstruction is then performed to collect scattering samples, and the Jensen-Shannon-based util-ity loss is evaluated. σsw is optimized in a block-iterative man-ner: at each epoch, an inner loop first adjusts σsw to best fit the current scattering distributions, and then the hardware param-eters are updated in the outer loop using gradients that reflect the optimal software setting. The hardware parameters consist of 6 longitudinal positions z, corresponding to a pair of detector modules, each of three panels, placed above and below the pas-sive volume. Additionally, the area of each panel is optimized by rescaling with a learned fractional budget weight per panel, keeping the total detector budget fixed. 53 The same utility loss is used in both stages: it is first mini-mized with respect to σsw in the inner loop, and subsequently backpropagated through the full di ff erentiable pipeline to up-date the hardware parameters in the outer loop. This bi-level procedure accounts for the stochasticity of the reconstructed scattering samples, ensuring that hardware updates are guided, at each step, by a software configuration that is locally optimal for the current statistical realization of the data. 

Loss landscape. Prior to optimization, we inspect the loss land-scape by performing a two-dimensional grid scan of the utility loss over representative hardware and software parameters. On the hardware side, we vary the e ff ective detector thickness, de-fined as the total longitudinal span of each detector module. This parameter directly controls the spacing between the con-stituent panels and therefore sets the angular lever arm and the hardware angular resolution σhw . On the software side, we scan the smoothing parameter σsw used to construct the di ff er-entiable PoCA scattering-angle distributions. The spatial reso-lution of each detector panel is held fixed at 1 mm, isolating the eff ect of detector thickness on the angular resolution. The panel areas are also fixed for a detector budget of 10 a.u., correspond-ing to around 1.29 m2 for each panel with a cost of 1 m−2. For each volume scan, a fixed sample of 3000 muons is generated, which is the resampled number of muons reaching the VoI. The resulting utility curves shown in Fig. 44 exhibit the ex-pected qualitative behavior. Increasing the detector thickness initially leads to a monotonic improvement in utility, driven by the enhanced angular lever arm and corresponding improve-ment in hardware angular resolution. The dependence on the software smoothing parameter follows a complementary pat-tern. For configurations with smaller hardware angular reso-lution, lower values of σsw are favored, as minimal smoothing preserves fine scattering features that enhance hypothesis sep-aration. However, beyond a certain limit, statistical limitations and noise set a practical lower bound on σsw . Treating these de-grees of freedom independently would lead to suboptimal or un-stable operating points. By optimizing hardware and software parameters jointly within a unified, di ff erentiable framework, the detector naturally converges to balanced configurations that maximize task-level performance, which is the central objective of this work. Based on the observed utility landscape, we conceptualize an optimal reference detector (Fig. 45 (c)) with a total thickness of 40 cm (corresponding to σhw = 0.005) and a software smooth-ing parameter σsw = 0.002. This detector serves as a reference to assess the performance achieved by the optimized detector. 

Results. To demonstrate an optimization procedure, we initial-ize the detector with a fixed total budget of 10 a.u. and with suboptimal panel positions, tightly stacked along the z axis as shown in Fig. 45 (a), and a suboptimal software smoothing parameter of 0.001. All panels are assigned the same spa-tial resolution of 1 mm. After gradient-based optimization, the detector converges to a configuration with improved panel spacing (Fig. 45 (b)) that produces an angular resolution of 

σhw = 0.0044, and a slightly increased area of the upper panel        

> Figure 44: Di ff erentiable hypothesis-test utility loss for high-Z anomaly detec-tion as a function of software smoothing parameter σsw .Curves correspond to di ff erent detector thicknesses (longitudinal separation between first and last panels in each detector module). Intra-separations between panels within a de-tector are the same in this scan. Smaller σsw preserves fine scattering features, enhancing separation between background and high-Z signal volumes, while larger σsw blurs statistical fluctuations. The plot illustrates the interplay be-tween hardware angular resolution (controlled by detector thickness) and soft-ware smoothing in shaping the detection utility.

improving acceptance. The achieved software smoothing pa-rameter is σsw = 0.0032. To assess the performance of the optimized detector, we adopt a reference-based evaluation protocol inspired by prac-tical cargo inspection workflows. For each set of VoI volumes, one background volume is designated as a reference, represent-ing a first-line X-ray scan that identifies regions likely free of high-density anomalies. All other volumes are then compared against this reference using the D JS of their scattering distribu-tions. Signal and background labels are used only to compute the ROC curve and the corresponding AUC. By repeating this procedure across multiple reference volumes and averaging, we obtain a robust measure of the detector’s discriminative power in a realistic scenario where a scanned region is evaluated rela-tive to a reference slice (see Tab. 6).                                         

> Table 6: Reference-based ROC AUC for the reference and optimized detectors across di ff erent signal /background pairs. Values are reported as mean ±stan-dard deviation reflecting the variability of AUC across repeated realizations of the scattering samples. Signal Background Reference AUC ( ±σ)Optimized AUC ( ±σ)Uranium Aluminium 0.954 ±0.026 0.954 ±0.016 Lead Aluminium 0.790 ±0.015 0.808 ±0.017 Iron Aluminium 0.542 ±0.034 0.518 ±0.030 Uranium Lead 0.521 ±0.016 0.501 ±0.012 Uranium Iron 0.580 ±0.041 0.579 ±0.027

Summary. We reformulate scattering-based muography as a di ff erentiable binary hypothesis test, replacing unstable voxel-level X0 reconstruction with a task-driven objective that directly measures separability between background-only and high-Z-containing volumes. The results show that gradient-based co-optimization of hardware and software parameters converges to 54 Figure 45: Comparison of detector geometries in the x–z plane. (a) Initial detector configuration prior to optimization. (b) Detector geometry obtained through gradient-descent optimization under the imposed budget constraint. (c) Reference detector configuration with the same total detector budget as (b), designed based on human intuition. 

performance comparable to that of an optimal reference detec-tor based on a partial grid scan. 

3.11.3. Geant 4-based hypothesis-testing co-design for the PoCA reconstruction of a concrete pillar Overview. This application aims to optimise a scattering muography system for reconstructing the density distribution of a reinforced concrete pillar. We “focus” the system on the pillar through selection of significant muons for a PoCA reconstruc-tion (217, 218) of the volume. Using a single G eant 4 simula-tion, we generate multiple system configurations with di ff erent co-design parameters and a fixed spatial resolution. The utility function evaluates both the total number of PoCA points, re-warding higher acceptance, and the quality of the reconstructed image. Detector positions and sizes are optimized considering the full angular muon flux. Hardware choices influence recon-struction (SW) mainly through angular resolution, which is af-fected by the separation of the detector layers. 

Simulation. We simulate the reinforced pillar scenario using Geant 4 and generate muons using EcoMug (219, 220), fully covering the pillar and the detectors with a semi-spherical gen-eration surface. Note that the detection muon flux is bidirectional. In the simulation we include six detection panels in total, but only four (two on either side of the pillar) are considered in the co-designed system. The purpose of this simulation is to capture all the meaningful muon flux with large detection layers po-sitioned very close to each other and to the pillar, saving the actual trajectories ("perfect spatial resolution") of the detected muons. The simulation software can be found in Ref. (221). 

Generation of system configurations. After saving the G eant 4-simulated muon trajectories, we use a new and customized layer of code to set a spatial resolution for the detection panels and to generate di ff erent panel separations and sizes, as well as muon event filters. It is worth mentioning that when generating detec-tion panel separations, we assume straight propagation in the air between. This new layer of code (222) exploits reconstruction tools from "Muograph" (223), among others, and is also used for the optimisation part of this study. 

The passive volume. The passive volume corresponds approx-imately to the space between the detection panels closest to the pillar, which are fixed at x = ±110 mm in this study. Its dimen-sions in the coordinate reference system are 0.2 × 0.6 × 0.6 m 3

and it is subdivided into voxels, which are the maximum size that allows the necessary calculations for optimization to be performed, i.e. 0.2 × 0.2 × 0.2 m 3. It is made up of the re-inforced pillar and the air on either side of it. The dimensions of the pillar are 0.2 × 0.2 × 0.6 m 3. The metal bars of the rein-forcement are located inside it. Within the passive volume, in turn, we define a target volume ( A) and a background volume (B). The target volume corresponds exactly to that of the pillar, while the background volume is composed of the six air voxels located on either side of it. 

The active volume. The active volume, or, in other words, the volume that contains the detection system, could be unlimited since, as previously mentioned, to generate new system con-figurations we simply propagate muon tracks in a straight line. In any case, during optimization, only up to a certain limit is inspected, since the system starts to undergone a significant ac-ceptance drop when separating the panels. Four squared detec-tion panels, two at each sides of the pillar, are used to recon-struct the muon trajectories. 

Imaging system and utility quantification. We reconstruct the pillar as a PoCA point density image, which should highlight high density areas. To quantitatively assess whether the scatter-ing activity inside the target region di ff ers from that of the sur-rounding background, we model the reconstructed PoCA events using a Poisson process with region-dependent exposure. A and B denote the two disjoint regions of interest (target and background volumes), and we define: 55 • NA, NB: number of PoCA points reconstructed in regions 

A and B, respectively. 

• EA, EB: e ff ective exposures of regions A and B.While E can be estimated using the geometric surface or vol-ume of a region, for a through-going muon beam the relevant exposure is more accurately represented by the total muon path length within the region, as the probability of scattering scales with the traversed material length. In all cases, E represents the eff ective measure over which scattering events may occur. Both strategies have been tested, but in this document we present re-sults in which the e ff ective exposure of each region is estimated from the total muon path length traversing the region. For each reconstructed muon track, the path length inside a given region is computed assuming a Straight Line Path (SLP), defined as the straight segment connecting the measured points of the track in the detectors. The exposure is then defined as the sum of these path lengths over all reconstructed muons. Ac-cordingly, the exposure for regions A and B is given by 

EA =

> Nμ

X

> i=1

Li,A , EB =

> Nμ

X

> i=1

Li,B , (58) where Li,A and Li,B denote the SLP path length of the i-th muon track within regions A and B, respectively, and Nμ is the total number of reconstructed muons. The PoCA counts in each region are assumed to follow inde-pendent Poisson distributions: 

NA ∼ Poisson( λA EA) , NB ∼ Poisson( λBEB) , (59) where λA and λB are the scattering rates per unit exposure in regions A and B.The null hypothesis corresponds to equal scattering density in both regions: 

H0 : λA = λB = λ , (60) while the alternative hypothesis allows for di ff erent scattering rates: 

H1 : λA , λB . (61) Under the null hypothesis H0, a single common rate is fitted: ˆλ0 = NA + NB

EA + EB

. (62) Under the alternative hypothesis H1, the maximum-likelihood estimators of the rates are ˆλA = NA

EA

, ˆλB = NB

EB

. (63) The corresponding log-likelihoods are given by 

ℓ1 = NA log ˆλA EA

 − ˆλA EA + NB log ˆλBEB

 − ˆλBEB , (64) 

ℓ0 = NA log ˆλ0 EA

 − ˆλ0 EA + NB log ˆλ0 EB

 − ˆλ0 EB , (65) where ℓ1 and ℓ0 denote the maximised log-likelihoods under the alternative and null hypotheses, respectively. The estimated scattering densities per unit exposure are de-fined as ˆρA = NA

EA

, ˆρB = NB

EB

, ˆρ0 = NA + NB

EA + EB

, (66) where ˆ ρ0 corresponds to the common density under the null hypothesis of equal scattering rates. Therefore, the Poisson Likelihood-Ratio Test (PLRT) statis-tic, our utility, is defined as 

U = 2

"

NA log ˆρA

ˆρ0

!

+ NB log ˆρB

ˆρ0

!# 

. (67) By construction, U ≥ 0, with U = 0 when the estimated scat-tering rates in the two regions are equal. U can be interpreted in terms of statistical significance, or converted into an equiva-lent Gaussian significance via Z = √U, where Z is the standard score, or z-score. The exposure correction ensures that the di ff erences in PoCA counts arise solely from the density distribution of the matter in-side the passive volume. When exposure is defined as the total muon path length through each region, the test naturally incor-porates detector geometry and directional e ff ects. The result-ing statistic provides both a formal hypothesis test and a scalar measure of contrast suitable for optimization procedures. 

Configuration and parameters of the optimization problem. 

The configuration and parameters are common for the sequen-tial HW-SW scan and the co-design of the full system, both pre-sented below. The study is performed with data from a single simulation scenario, corresponding to a muon flux acquisition time of ≈ 82 h. It is also worth mentioning that we emulate the spatial resolution of the panels adding a tridimensional Gaus-sian spread to the actual muon hits provided by G eant 4, which in this case is σx = 1 mm, σy = 1 mm, σz = 1 mm. The optimized parameters are detection panel separation ( x1)and area di ff erence ( x2) on the HW side, and a deviation thresh-old to accept muon events ( x3) on the reconstruction SW side. The first parameter, x1, refers to the separation between panels closer to the pillar (interior panels) and those further away (ex-terior panels). The second parameter, denoted as x2, represents the relative area di ff erence between the exterior panels and the interior panels for a single panel pair (the panels always keep a square shape). To calculate x2, the di ff erence in surface area be-tween one exterior panel and one interior panel, normalized by the reference panel area used in the G eant 4 simulations, Aref ,which corresponds to 0.36 m 2. Mathematically, x2 is expressed as: 

x2 = Aext − Aint 

Aref 

× 100 , (68) where Aext and Aint denote the surface areas of the exterior and interior panels of a single pair, respectively. In all the config-urations, the total detection area employed for the four panels, 

Atot , is kept constant, such that: 

Atot = 2 ( Aext + Aint ) = 4Aref . (69) ensuring that any increase in the exterior panel area is exactly compensated by a corresponding decrease in the interior panel 56 Figure 46: First step of the sequential scan of the solution space used to opti-mize the muography system. The figure shows the PLRT-based utility, U, for di ff erent values of the HW parameters ( x1 and x2), which are related to the sep-aration and area of the detection panels.  

> Figure 47: Second step of the sequential scan of the solution space used to optimize the muography system. The figure shows the PLRT-based utility, U,for di ff erent values of the SW parameter ( x3), which consists in a deviation threshold for accepting the muon events.

area, and vice versa . Note that the system is symmetric; i.e. , the panel separation ( x1) and area di ff erence ( x2) of the detectors on both sides of the pillar are the same and, therefore, are both modelled with a unique parameter. Finally, the third parameter, 

x3, is the quantile value of the muon deviation distribution used to establish the high-pass threshold. 

Sequential HW-SW solution space scan. To demonstrate the co-design paradigm in this application, we compare the optimal utility obtained by means of a sequential HW-SW solution scan with that yielded by a simultaneous co-design optimisation. To start with the demonstration, we scan the solution space of the HW parameters (see Fig. 46). We set the HW parameters to the optimal values, and then run an exploration of the solutions for the SW parameter, ob-taining the results shown in Fig. 47. They show a significant improvement in utility when increasing the values of the SW parameter. The optimal parameters yielded by the sequential optimisa-tion are x1 = 15.0 cm, x2 = 120.0 %, and x3 = 0.940, which correspond to an utility of 2571 ± 414. 

Co-design. To confirm that certain crosstalk between HW and SW parameters exist, we encapsulate the full HW-SW system into a Bayesian optimization algorithm, which performs the co-design. It internally runs our system configuration generation functions and maximizes the utility function. Optimization is carried out using a Gaussian Process surrogate model via the 

gp_minimize routine. The parameter search space is defined by the set of optimization dimensions, and a total of 100 func-tion evaluations are performed (far fewer than we have used to perform sequential scanning). The optimisation is initialized with 20 randomly sampled points to provide an initial explo-ration of the parameter space, which corresponds with that in-spected in the sequential scan. Subsequently, new evaluation points are selected by maximising the Expected Improvement acquisition function, which balances exploration and exploita-tion. Several complementary diagnostics are carried out, which provide insight into the optimization trajectory, parameter sta-bility, exploration properties, convergence behaviour, and struc-ture of the objective function landscape. Specifically, Fig. 48 shows the evolution of the best-so-far parameter values together with the corresponding utility during the optimisation process. At each iteration i, the best-so-far parameter vector x∗ 

> i

is defined as 

x∗ 

> i

= arg min  

> j≤i

U(x j),

where U(x) denotes the objective function evaluated by the op-timiser. The associated best-so-far utility is given by U(x∗ 

> i

). In Fig. 48 each parameter is min–max normalised over the full optimisation history to allow direct comparison on a common scale. The almost constant value of parameters from approx-imately iteration 30 onwards indicate that the algorithm has converged towards an optimal solution, which in this case is 

x1 = 12.1 cm, x2 = 83.6 %, and x3 = 0.957, and provides a utility of 3863 ± 425. The performance of co-design opti-misation is compared to that of the sequential scan by eval-uating the separation between their utility values in units of the combined statistical uncertainty, which is of approximately 2.2σ. This indicates a meaningful improvement in the utility values (sub-optimality ratio S R of the sequential scan relative to the co-design of 1 .50). Concerning the evolution of param-eters, the co-designed system places the panels closer together to maximize the detected muon flux, reduces the size di ff erence between the inner and outer panels to capture greater vertical length of the pillar, and slightly increases the event admission deviation threshold. 

Summary and next steps. In this study, we present the disad-vantages of designing a muography system by sequentially op-timising HW and SW. In this simple application example, we show how the HW parameters, which are related to the separa-tion of the detection panels and their size, interact with the SW parameter, i.e. , muon filtering by deflection. Angular resolu-tion, which depends on spatial resolution and panel separation, 57 Figure 48: Simultaneous HW-SW Bayesian Optimisation. Evolution of the nor-malised best-so-far parameters, x∗            

> i, and the corresponding PLRT utility, U(x∗
> i), as a function of the optimisation iteration.
> Figure 49: PoCA reconstructions (left) and detector panel dimensions and locations (right) for the two optimisation strategies: sequential scan [ U=
> 2571 ±414] (top) and co-design [ U=3863 ±425] (bottom). The color scale image depicts the joint two-dimensional probability distributions of the POCA scattering centres. It is worth remembering that the panels are square in shape.

plays a key role in this regard. The e ff ects of system acceptance and target geometry and density are also worth mentioning. To avoid the aforementioned disadvantages of optimizing the system by means of sequential scans of the HW and SW solu-tion spaces, we co-designed the full system using a Bayesian optimisation algorithm. Our results show that we improved the utility of the system. In addition, this improvement agrees with the enhancement of PoCA reconstruction, which indicates a good fit to the problem and a satisfactory design of the meth-ods and the system’s utility employed. An additional observation is that in all cases the system man-ages to di ff erentiate the part of the passive volume occupied by the pillar (volume A) from that occupied by air (volume B), with z-scores of Z = 51 in the sequential scanning and Z = 62 in the co-design. The next steps we envisage in this G eant 4-based co-design investigation include the development of more advanced mod-els of the muography system to be optimized, adding new pa-rameters –including those describing the performance of the electronic system (synchronisation, detection thresholds, etc.). Regarding the SW part, performing a complete X0-distribution inference is an important objective, which could also improve the quality of the reconstruction and incorporate new co-design parameters. We also contemplate applying this co-design tech-nique in the attenuation modality of muography. Finally, and in relation to this specific application in reinforced concrete pil-lars, it should be remembered that the ultimate goal is to co-design the system with the specific purpose of detecting the re-inforcement bars. To this end, we plan to significantly increase the production of G eant 4 simulation data in order to perform meaningful co-design optimisations considering as targets the smaller volumes of the bars. In addition, the availability of additional data could also allow to quantify the Monte Carlo statistical uncertainties linked to G eant 4 simulations. 

3.11.4. Conclusion 

In this subsection we demonstrated the capabilities of princi-pled co-design of muon scattering tomography systems, span-ning detector hardware, inference software, and operational pa-rameters. Through contrastive imaging case studies, we illus-trated how simultaneous optimization can yield detector layouts and reconstruction strategies that are intuitive yet non-obvious, eff ectively balancing angular resolution, acceptance, statisti-cal e ffi ciency, and exposure time under realistic constraints. Reframing scattering-based muography as a hypothesis-testing problem rather than a full volumetric reconstruction task, we then demonstrated end-to-end gradient-based optimization of detector performance with respect to statistical detection power of anomalous high-Z material. A Bayesian approach to co-design muography systems for the purpose of scanning rein-forced concrete was also demonstrated, leveraging Monte Carlo simulations. 

3.12. Other applications 

To complete this Section, below we provide a short discus-sion of three additional applications for LHC physics where co-design is relevant. 

3.12.1. FPGA-Based Co-Design for Real-Time Triggers and Data Reduction 

Next-generation particle physics and astrophysics experi-ments are facing unprecedented challenges driven by rapidly increasing data rates, finer detector granularity, and stringent real-time decision requirements. Facilities such as the High-Luminosity LHC, next-generation neutrino experiments, radio 58 astronomy arrays, and gravitational-wave observatories will op-erate in regimes where only a small fraction of the produced data can be retained for o ffl ine analysis. Meeting these demands requires computing architectures capable of fast, deterministic processing close to the data source. Field-Programmable Gate Arrays have therefore become a key enabling technology for future experiments. Their ability to deliver ultra-low-latency, high-throughput, and energy-e ffi cient processing makes them uniquely suited for real-time triggering, data reduction, and near-detector inference. Unlike CPU- or GPU-based systems, FPGAs provide fine-grained control over parallelism, dataflow, and numerical precision, allowing algorithms to be tailored pre-cisely to hardware constraints and timing budgets. Realizing the full potential of FPGAs increasingly relies on a co-design paradigm in which algorithms, ML models, firmware, and hardware architectures are developed together. Hardware–software and algorithm–hardware co-design allows physics-driven optimization of performance while minimizing data movement and latency. This integrated approach ensures that detector capabilities, computing resources, and scientific objectives evolve coherently, thereby maximizing the physics reach of future experiments. The importance of this approach is clearly illustrated by the trigger systems of LHC experiments. The LHC produces pro-ton–proton collisions at a rate of 40 MHz, far exceeding the capacity for permanent data storage. Experiments such as AT-LAS and CMS reduce this rate using a two-stage trigger system. The first stage, the Level-1 trigger, is implemented in custom FPGA-based hardware and uses information from calorimeters and muon detectors to select events at a rate of approximately 100 kHz within a fixed latency of about 4 microseconds. Events passing this stage are processed by the High-Level Trigger, a software-based system that performs more detailed reconstruc-tion and reduces the event rate to roughly 1 kHz for storage. Because the Level-1 trigger rejects the vast majority of events, its design has a direct impact on physics sensitivity. While the current trigger architecture has enabled landmark re-sults such as the discovery of the Higgs boson, it is inherently limited by predefined selection criteria. The High-Luminosity LHC will increase collision rates by more than an order of mag-nitude and significantly raise event complexity, pushing exist-ing trigger strategies to their limits and motivating more flexible and powerful real-time algorithms. In response, collider experiments including ATLAS, CMS, LHCb, and Belle II are actively exploring FPGA-based ML for tasks such as event filtering, graph neural network based tracking, jet tagging, anomaly detection, radiation-tolerant low-latency compression, and real-time reconstruction. Similar ef-forts are underway in other fields, with the DUNE neutrino experiment investigating online ML for data acquisition and gravitational-wave observatories developing FPGA-based real-time inference and low-latency alert systems. Another example is a neural-network-based trigger system for ultra-high-energy neutrino detectors, currently being devel-oped for arrays of autonomous radio detector stations deployed within the ice sheets at the South Pole (IceCube-Gen2 (129)) and in Greenland (RNO-G (131)). The main challenges are the high sampling rates of approx. a Gsample /s per antenna, a lim-ited power budget of only around 30 W per detector station, and limited data rate which requires data reduction of several orders of magnitude. Preliminary studies are promising (224, 225) and as part of the NuRadioOpt project, this approach has been shown to potentially double the neutrino detection rate (137), which would be equivalent to doubling the array size. Although ML inference on FPGAs o ff ers clear latency advantages, developing and deploying such models remains challenging. Neural networks must satisfy strict constraints on latency, resource usage, and power consumption, while maintaining su ffi cient physics performance. Tools such as 

hls4ml (226) facilitate the translation of trained networks into FPGA firmware using high-level synthesis. However, current workflows provide limited feedback before synthesis, making it di ffi cult to determine whether a given model will fit on a tar-get device. Since synthesis can take hours and failed attempts are common for large networks, this significantly slows the de-velopment cycle. Recent studies have demonstrated the feasibility of deploying advanced ML models at the Level-1 trigger. Examples include FPGA-based anomaly detection using variational autoencoders in CMS (227) and the deployment of continuous normalizing flows for unsupervised anomaly detection (228). These results highlight the potential of ML to enhance real-time event selec-tion, but they also underscore the need for systematic optimiza-tion across both algorithmic and hardware dimensions. Additionally, several studies have systematically explored ML architectures under explicit constraints on latency, through-put, and FPGA resource usage (229). Hardware-aware neu-ral architecture search embeds device-level constraints—such as limits on DSP slices, LUTs, BRAM blocks, and pipeline depth—directly into the optimization objective, enabling a prin-cipled balance between predictive accuracy and hardware ef-ficiency. Complementary advances in gradient-based mixed-precision quantization further integrate numerical precision into the training loop, allowing bit-widths to be co-optimized with model parameters to reduce resource utilization while preserv-ing physics performance (230). These studies demonstrate that architecture design, precision optimization, and structural sim-plification can be unified within a coherent co-design frame-work for resource-constrained, real-time deployment. A sim-ilar study is presented in Sec. 3.12.2, demonstrating how ML parameters and FPGA resources can be jointly co-designed to satisfy stringent latency and resource constraints. Co-design of ML model architectures, hyperparameters, and FPGA hardware resources provides a path forward. By jointly optimizing accuracy, latency, energy consumption, and re-source utilization, co-design enables ML deployments that sat-isfy the stringent constraints of real-time systems, including la-tency budgets as low as a few hundred nanoseconds. Such ap-proaches will be essential for fully exploiting FPGA-based ML in the trigger and data acquisition systems of next-generation experiments. 59 3.12.2. Co-Design and Optimization of Unsupervised Anomaly Detection for Real-Time FPGA Deployment 

At the LHC, unsupervised anomaly detection (AD) is an emerging paradigm in the search of unexpected physics pro-cesses, which avoids reliance on predefined signal models. In-stead of being trained on specific new-physics signatures, a model may learn the distribution of Standard Model data and thus the capability to flag events that significantly deviate from it —-an approach that complements traditional physics-driven searches in HEP. This model-agnostic paradigm, pioneered at the Tevatron at the turn of the century (231), has been explored in multiple recent studies highlighting the need for model-independent strategies in new physics searches (232, 233) 11 .Model independence is particularly critical at trigger level, where supervised algorithms may fail to capture unforeseen phenomena. The low latency of Level-1 Triggers in ATLAS and CMS and their resource constraints demand highly opti-mized architectures of useful machine learning models for real-time deployment (228). Here we discuss a brief case study demonstrating the co-design of ML parameters for an unsupervised anomaly detec-tion algorithm alongside FPGA resource constraints, illustrat-ing a hardware-aware optimization strategy suitable for real-time trigger deployment. A Continuous Normalizing Flow model is employed for unsupervised anomaly detection and is trained via Flow Matching on Standard Model data. The model maps input events to a Gaussian latent space and assigns anomaly scores based on their likelihood under the learned Gaussian distribution. The training dataset consists of 100k SM events, with 20k SM events reserved for testing. Performance is evaluated using a benchmark new-physics signal, A → 4ℓ

(50 GeV), in which a neutral scalar boson A with mass 50 GeV decays into two o ff -shell Z bosons. Each event is represented using low-level kinematic variables and flattened into a fixed 57-dimensional input vector. The same dataset sizes are used consistently throughout the full optimization pipeline. For more information about the dataset, features and architecture, refer to Ref. (228). We adopt a global hyperparameter search strategy to sys-tematically explore the design space of flow-matching–based anomaly detection models. Rather than relying on manual tun-ing, the problem is formulated as a bi-objective optimization task: AUC ↑ , BOPs ↓

where AUC measures predictive performance and Bit Opera-tions (BOPs) serve as a hardware-aware proxy for FPGA com-putational cost. The search is performed using a Non-Dominated Sorting Ge-netic Algorithm (NSGA-II) evolutionary algorithm, which ap-proximates the Pareto front and identifies optimal trade-o ff sbetween accuracy and computational cost. The search space spans architectural, training, and hardware-related parameters. Hidden dimensions for the multi-layer perceptron backbone are 

> 11 For a list of over 100 works focusing on AD for HEP searches see the living review here: https: // iml-wg.github.io /HEPML-LivingReview /.

sampled as powers of two, depth is varied, and dropouts and ac-tivations are explored. Training hyperparameters include learn-ing rate ranges, batch sizes, and flow matching coe ffi cients. After completing 400 global trials, Pareto dominance filter-ing is applied to remove configurations that are strictly inferior in both objectives. Eight Pareto-optimal architectures are re-tained and then refined locally using the Tree-Structured Parzen Estimator sampler. Quantization-aware training (QAT) and sparsification techniques are then applied for hardware-e ffi cient deployment. QAT allows networks to adapt to low-precision arithmetic during training to facilitate FPGA inference (226). Unstructured pruning and structured pruning strategies are used for weight sparsity and reduced architectural size. Analytical hardware estimations replace BOPs with latency (cycles and nanoseconds) as the hardware objective. Pareto filtering yields five FPGA-feasible models. Exported models are converted to high-level synthesis C ++ 

using hls4ml , which bridges ML frameworks and FPGA syn-thesis—enabling real-time neural inference. All five models successfully pass FPGA synthesis evaluation, as seen in Tab. 7. Despite significant variation in model size and numerical pre-cision, all final designs achieve sub-50 ns latency. This demon-strates that structured pruning and reuse-factor scheduling ef-fectively constrain inference delay. 

3.12.3. Agentic coding for experiments 

The longevity and evolutionary scope of the codebases of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), consisting of tens of mil-lions of lines of code developed and maintained over decades by thousands of physicists, pose significant challenges in terms of maintenance and long-term sustainability of large-scale sci-entific software. The need to modernise and sustain software systems of such complexity and durability requires the adop-tion of radically new computational paradigms. Beyond source code, similar concerns apply to the extensive corpus of technical documentation produced within these col-laborations, which increasingly relies on lightweight markup languages such as Markdown and LaTeX as de facto program-ming languages for writing. Treating documentation artefacts as first-class, executable objects in the software ecosystem fore-grounds issues of long-term preservation, format obsolescence, and reproducibility that parallel those faced by the underlying code, and suggests the need for explicit documentation archi-tectures, curation workflows, and sustainability policies. Stud-ies on the preservation of TeX /LaTeX documents and on La-TeX as an archival format show that markup-based formats can support long-term accessibility and migration to future repre-sentation standards, but only when embedded in well-defined repository infrastructures and conversion pipelines. At the scale of LHC-like collaborations, documentation must there-fore be designed, versioned and validated with the same engi-neering rigour as the software it describes, leveraging institu-tional document-management systems and community guide-lines to ensure continuity over the multi-decadal lifetimes of the experiments (234, 235, 236). In this context, Agentic AI Systems represent an emerg-ing and rapidly expanding area of research that, catalysed by 60 Table 7: FPGA resource utilization and latency for the final Pareto-selected models. Model Hidden Layers Act. Bits AUC Spars. Lat. (ns) DSP LUT FF BRAM Dimensions M1 256 4 ReLU 32 0.9169 0.050 40 5928 17784 1650 280 M2 256 3 ReLU 32 0.9155 0.053 30 4904 14712 1138 166 M3 (pruned) 256 3 ReLU 32 0.8892 0.986 30 3312 9936 626 55 M4 16 3 ReLU 16 0.8865 0.683 45 555 1665 142 0M5 16 2 ReLU 4 0.8852 0.780 30 506 1518 128 0

LLMs, o ff ers a potential solution. An AI agent is a computa-tional entity that perceives its environment and takes actions to achieve goals. Although the concept of autonomous software agents dates back to the 1990s, their definition and capabilities underwent a profound transformation with the advent of Large Language Models (237, 238). Traditional AI agents were generally task-specific and deter-ministic, focused on automating limited tasks such as retriev-ing information, summarizing data or responding to dialogues. They often operated through single-step logic or pre-defined rules, lacking the deep reasoning, adaptability and persistence required to solve complex, multi-step problems. Their cogni-tive foundations were often based on symbolic logic, finite state machines (FSM) or cognitive models. Classic examples include MYCIN, ELIZA, SOAR and ACT-R. In contrast, modern AI Agents, which have gained significant traction since 2023 thanks to LLMs, are autonomous or semi-autonomous software entities capable of interpreting high-level goals, decomposing tasks into sub-goals, planning execution strategies and dynamically adapting their behaviour based on feedback and results, requiring minimal human intervention. This capacity for continuous reasoning, planning and adapta-tion positions AI agents as promising tools for the evolutionary management and sustainable maintenance of extremely large scientific codebases. However, these promises are not without risk (239). The excitement of faster code development could lead developers to neglect fundamental practices and oversight of what the AI does, resulting in the accumulation of technical debt and ero-sion of code quality in the long term. Following the energy-landscape perspective on machine learning (240), where the loss function defines an e ff ective en-ergy over model parameters, we can heuristically extend the analogy to LLM-based software development workflows. In this view, the joint system comprising the model, the evolving codebase, and the task specification explores a high-dimensional landscape with basins corresponding to partially-satisfactory code states. Due to architectural biases and training-induced inductive priors, a single LLM may be-come trapped in suboptimal basins, analogous to local min-ima (241). Collaborative or ensemble schemes, in which distinct LLMs with di ff erent inductive biases sequentially or jointly modify the code, can be interpreted as perturbations of the e ff ective landscape, facilitating escape from such basins in a way rem-iniscent of multi-funnel energy landscapes and landscape en-sembles (242). Experiments could in principle develop their own LLMs and science-driven agentic workflows, tightly adapted to their soft-ware stacks, data formats and documentation practices, with the goal of enabling collaborators to devote more of their lim-ited time to physics, while preserving safety and code quality. Rather than repeatedly fine-tuning separate models on evolv-ing, experiment-specific corpora—an approach that quickly be-comes costly, brittle and prone to obsolescence as the under-lying code and documentation change—retrieval-augmented, agentic architectures o ff er a more sustainable path, in which a strong general-purpose model is grounded at inference time on versioned repositories, technical notes and operational proce-dures through domain-aware retrieval pipelines. This design ex-ternalises most experiment-specific knowledge into maintain-able knowledge bases and configuration artefacts, allowing up-dates to propagate via standard software and documentation workflows, while reserving light-weight fine-tuning for stable, high-value adaptations such as domain-specific terminology, style or safety constraints. Such agentic systems can be staged: starting from documentation-centric assistants that help keep manuals, READMEs and configuration files consistent and up to date, and progressively evolving towards multi-agent work-flows capable of refactoring code, orchestrating CI pipelines and supporting complex analysis tasks, always under explicit human oversight, in line with emerging empirical evidence on agentic coding tools and configuration practices. Building on these considerations, it is instructive to distin-guish between domain knowledge that is structurally stable over long timescales and information that evolves rapidly with the software and documentation ecosystem. Empirical studies comparing RAG and fine-tuning pipelines indicate that retrieval-augmented generation systematically im-proves answer quality and that domain-specific fine-tuning, when applied selectively, can further consolidate the gains pro-vided by contextual grounding—the two approaches thus prov-ing complementary rather than mutually exclusive (243, 244, 245, 246). For LHC-scale collaborations, a pragmatic strategy is there-fore to reserve fine-tuning for slowly varying or e ff ectively immutable components of the knowledge base—such as ter-minology, core physics concepts, safety norms, or enduring architectural patterns—while relying on RAG over curated, version-controlled repositories to expose frequently updated code, configuration and documentation to agentic workflows. In this hybrid regime, the model embodies a stable prior over the experiment’s conceptual landscape, whereas retrieval pipelines continuously adapt the accessible context as the soft-ware and its documentation evolve, reducing the need for re-peated re-training cycles and aligning AI-assisted development 61 with existing maintenance and review processes. Despite recent extensions of context windows into the million-token regime, which enable models to ingest entire monographs or sizeable code modules in a single pass, this working memory remains fundamentally finite and subject to performance degradation at extreme lengths. For agentic work-flows operating on modular software ecosystems and documen-tation spanning decades, this limitation further motivates ar-chitectures where long-term knowledge is stored and indexed externally, and agents iteratively retrieve and summarise only the most relevant fragments, instead of relying on a single, ever-growing prompt (247, 248, 246). From a systems perspective, the co-evolution of large scien-tific codebases, LLM-based assistants and the hardware plat-forms on which they run naturally suggests a joint optimisation problem over software, model and infrastructure parameters. In a simplified view, one may consider an e ff ective objective function L(s, h, a) that encodes problem-dependent trade-o ff sbetween developer productivity, code quality, latency, through-put, energy consumption and resource costs, where s denotes software-level parameters ( e.g. build configurations, depen-dency graphs, testing policies), h hardware-level parameters (e.g. accelerator type, precision, memory hierarchy, scheduling policies) and a agentic workflow parameters ( e.g. task decom-position strategies, tool-use policies, review depth). Research on hardware–software co-design and multi-objective optimisa-tion in machine-learning systems shows that treating these lay-ers jointly, rather than in isolation, can yield Pareto-optimal configurations that significantly improve performance-per-watt and system-level e ffi ciency. For LHC-scale collaborations, parametrising codebases, models and agentic workflows with explicit graph-like structures and exposing them to such multi-objective search would support more controlled, measur-able and quality-assured deployment of AI assistants, while making explicit the trade-o ff s between energy e ffi ciency, re-sponsiveness and the rigorous software-engineering standards required in high-stakes scientific environments (249, 250, 251). 

4. Co-Design in Industrial Applications 

In profit-driven industrial research the exploration of solu-tions for the simultaneous optimization of systems and software design has reached a more advanced stage than in fundamental science research, mainly because of larger investments as well as a higher predisposition to disruptive innovation by the indus-trial sector. It is precisely because of this emerging gap that we wish to examine in this section a few industrial use cases, to try and foster a synergy in the area of design optimization be-tween experimental science and technology –where at this point of time we believe it is the latter than may help the former move forward. 

4.1. Digital pen 

The development of a digital pen provides a concrete exam-ple of the challenges and opportunities of hardware–software co-design. Unlike abstract benchmarks or controlled proto-types, this case is defined by real industrial constraints: form power consumption, latency requirements, and memory limi-tation. These constraints are not optional design choices but inherent to the product’s function and user expectations. In what follows, we present how the project team addressed these challenges. We describe the solutions deployed, covering both hardware-level design decisions and software strategies, and highlight how co-design shaped the overall system archi-tecture. 

4.1.1. Project presentation 

The objective of the digital pen project (252) was to design a device that integrates the familiar advantages of handwriting with the capabilities of digital systems (see Fig. 50). Handwrit-ing remains a widely accessible and e ffi cient mode of input, providing flexibility and immediacy compared to keyboards or touch interfaces. Reproducing these qualities while enabling reliable digital capture introduced several technical challenges. From the early stages, the project had to account for con-straints related to ergonomics, battery capacity, and the need to achieve accurate, low-latency handwriting recognition. Ad-dressing these requirements necessitated a hardware–software co-design strategy (see Fig. 51): sensing, data acquisition, and energy-use constraints were managed at the hardware level, while recognition algorithms, adaptability, and interac-tion mechanisms were implemented in software. This coordinated methodology enabled performance and ef-ficiency optimizations across system layers, without compro-mising the expected writing experience. The following sections describe the solutions employed at both the hardware and soft-ware levels and examine how co-design influenced the resulting system architecture 

4.1.2. Constraints on hardware, software, and data 

The design of the digital pen is governed by strict product-level constraints that directly couple hardware, embedded soft-ware and learning algorithms. On the hardware side, the pen must remain close to the form factor of a conventional writ-ing instrument: low weight, balanced mass distribution and comfortable grip for children and adults. These ergonomics limit battery size and therefore the available energy budget for sensing, processing and wireless communication. The current Digipen generation (see Fig. 52) integrates multiple kinematic sensors (two 3-axis accelerometers, a 3-axis gyroscope, a 3-axis magnetometer and a force sensor) sampled up to 400 Hz, and streams data over Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE), with trans-mission delays in the order of 10–40 ms (253, 254) At the same time, the on-board microcontroller is constrained to sub-megabyte non-volatile memory and a few hundred kilobytes of RAM, as typical for low-power IoT-class SoCs, which sets an upper bound on model size and intermediate bu ff ers (255, 256). On the software and algorithmic side, the main requirement is to reconstruct and interpret handwriting in (near) real time in order to provide immediate pedagogical feedback in appli-cations such as KIHT /Kaligo (252). This excludes very deep models or algorithms with high latency or irregular control flow, 62 Figure 50: The goal of the digital pen project is to embed a model into the pen to enable the reconstruction of handwriting trajectories from the pen’s kinematic sensors. 

and favours architectures that are both e ffi cient and streamable (e.g. , Temporal Convolutional Networks) (253, 255). The BLE link and tablet impose additional constraints on bandwidth and latency: only a limited subset of raw or preprocessed signals can be transmitted, and any computation o ffl oaded to the tablet must not introduce a noticeable delay from the user’s perspec-tive, especially in learning scenarios with continuous guidance. Finally, the project is constrained by data availability and domain variability. Ground-truth trajectories can only be col-lected when writing on a tablet with an EMR layer, not directly on paper, which motivated the construction of dedicated dual-acquisition datasets such as IRISA–KIHT (253, 254). These datasets exhibit several sources of variability: di ff erent writers (children vs. adults), surfaces (tablet vs. paper) and acquisition conditions, with misaligned sampling rates and asynchronous timestamps between sensors and tablet (253). Coping with this variability requires sophisticated preprocessing ( e.g. , Dynamic Time Warping alignment), domain adaptation techniques and careful evaluation metrics. 

4.1.3. A priori ideas and initial design assumptions 

At the beginning of the project, the team approached the problem with several “reasonable” but ultimately limiting as-sumptions. From an application point of view, it was tempt-ing to treat the Digipen as a drop-in replacement for a tablet stylus: the idea was to treat Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) signals as another form of online handwriting and reuse ex-isting Kaligo /KIHT recognition pipelines originally designed for tablet trajectories. Early prototypes (252) relied on clas-sical sequence models adapted from speech recognition ( e.g. ,Kaldi-style HMM /NN hybrids) to map sensor streams directly to characters or words, in line with previous work on IMU-based handwriting recognition. In this view, trajectory recon-struction (257) was seen mainly as an intermediate by-product, and recognition accuracy was the primary metric. On the hardware side, the initial expectation was that all “in-telligent” processing could run on a companion device (tablet or PC), leaving the pen firmware responsible only for sampling, basic filtering and BLE streaming. This is consistent with many existing pen-based systems, where the pen is essentially a sen-sor head and all computation is o ffl oaded. Under this assump-tion, model size and computational cost (258, 256) were not considered first-order constraints; the main concern was ensur-ing su ffi cient sampling rate and robust wireless transmission. At the data level, it was also assumed that models trained on tablet-based acquisition would generalise with minimal addi-tional e ff ort to handwriting on paper, with the surface playing a secondary role. The KIHT and DL4IoT studies, along with the first dual-acquisition experiments, quickly showed the limits of these assumptions: IMU-only signals are significantly noisier and structurally di ff erent from tablet trajectories; paper and tablet domains di ff er in friction and dynamics; and some degree of on-device processing is required to respect latency and bandwidth constraints while keeping the system scalable to large deploy-ments in schools. These insights (253, 254, 255) motivated a shift towards a genuine hardware–software co-design strategy. 

4.1.4. Software choices 

The software stack has been organised around a dedicated trajectory reconstruction pipeline, rather than treating recon-struction as a by-product of recognition. The first pillar of this stack is a Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN) architecture that maps multi-channel IMU signals and force measurements to 2D displacement vectors, trained with DTW-based align-ment and evaluated using the Fréchet distance (253). This TCN model demonstrated a clear advantage over earlier CNN base-lines on multiple datasets (FAU–EINNS, IRISA–KIHT), par-ticularly in its ability to exploit a temporal receptive field (253) adapted to the 400 Hz sensor rate while remaining compact enough for eventual deployment. Building on this, a Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architecture was introduced to explicitly disentangle touching and hover-ing parts of the trajectory. One expert module focuses on the fine-grained reconstruction of pen-down strokes, incorpo-rating temporal context and physical constraints, while a sec-ond expert module leverages an additional height dimension to better model pen-up repositioning. The two expert mod-ules (259, 254) are trained jointly to produce a coherent tra-jectory, significantly improving the placement of new strokes, which is crucial for reconstructing complex words and multi-stroke characters. 63 Figure 51: Hardware-software co-design workflow integrating neural-network quantization, system-on-chip requirement derivation, and system-level simulation to guide iterative HW-SW optimizations. 

Domain adaptation is another key software choice. Signals acquired on tablets and on paper di ff er markedly, especially in noise characteristics and dynamics. A dedicated domain adap-tation framework based on representation learning and adver-sarial / discrepancy-based losses was therefore adopted to re-duce domain shift between acquisition conditions, leveraging earlier work on tablet–paper adaptation in online handwriting recognition. This approach (259, 254) proved important when moving from controlled tablet experiments to realistic paper-writing scenarios, as reported in both the ADAPDA workshop paper and in the IGS 2025 contribution dedicated to “writing on paper and getting the online trace”. Finally, given the tight on-device constraints, the team in-vested in model compression and hardware-aware architecture search for the MoE experts. Using zero-cost proxies (NAS-WOT) and multi-objective Bayesian optimisation, TCN vari-ants with as few as ∼ 11 k parameters were identified, fitting within ≈ 66 kB of ROM and 74 kB of RAM while preserv-ing acceptable reconstruction quality. This compression step is essential to make on-pen inference feasible and strongly influ-enced (254, 255, 257) the final structure of the software models described in the thesis (260). 

4.1.5. Hardware choices 

The hardware architecture of the Digipen has been iteratively refined to support the needs of trajectory reconstruction while respecting industrial constraints. The sensing front-end is built around a set of low-cost, low-power inertial sensors: two 3-axis accelerometers placed at di ff erent positions in the barrel, a 3-axis gyroscope, a 3-axis magnetometer, and a unidimensional force sensor on the tip. This configuration (256, 258, 253, 254) provides su ffi cient redundancy to infer fine movements and pen orientation, while remaining compatible with cost and as-sembly constraints for mass production. Mechanical features such as moulded grips were introduced to encourage a stable hand posture and reduce orientation variability, which simpli-fies downstream learning. From a processing perspective, the pen uses an ultra-low-power microcontroller with limited flash and RAM, comple-mented by a BLE radio to communicate with tablets and smart-phones. This choice reflects the need to run at least a subset of the reconstruction and recognition pipeline locally in future re-visions, without compromising battery life. Early system-level studies on hardware-aware workload distribution between pen and host device demonstrated that carefully splitting feature ex-traction and classification across both ends can reduce energy consumption and latency while maintaining accuracy. These results (255) informed the decision to reserve a fraction of the MCU budget for on-device TCN inference, and to standardise data formats for e ffi cient transfer of intermediate representa-tions. The team investigated specialised hardware accelerators for temporal models as part of a broader DL4IoT e ff ort. Co-designed accelerators such as ATLAS (for LSTM-like mod-els) and LOTTA (for TCNs) illustrate how approximate com-puting and FPGA-based implementations can dramatically re-duce energy per inference in time-series workloads, including handwriting-related tasks. While these accelerators (255, 257) are not yet integrated into the current Digipen, they provide a roadmap for future versions or for docking stations where more powerful, yet energy-e ffi cient, processing could be o ffl oaded. The general co-design guidelines discussed in the DL4IoT pa-per – notably the emphasis on early hardware /software co-exploration and explicit performance–energy trade-o ff s – di-rectly influenced these hardware choices. 

4.1.6. Joint hardware–software optimisation 

The final architecture of the digital pen emerged from sev-eral cycles of joint hardware–software optimisation, rather than from independent tuning of sensors, firmware and neural net-works. At the sensing and pre-processing level, the decision to adopt DTW-based alignment between IMU streams and tablet trajectories was not purely algorithmic: it was enabled by pre-cise time-stamping in the firmware and by constraining BLE packetisation to preserve temporal structure, thereby ensuring that alignment remains robust in the presence of 10–40 ms transmission jitter. Similarly, the choice of sampling rate (400 Hz for Digipen v6) and quantisation formats (253, 254) was made jointly with the TCN receptive field design, so that models could exploit enough context without exploding mem-ory requirements. At the inference level, hardware-aware Neural Architecture Search and compression were driven by explicit hardware con-straints (flash, RAM, MAC throughput) while using Fréchet distance as a task-specific performance objective (254, 253). This resulted in a family of Pareto-optimal models that span 64 Figure 52: ©STABILO International Digipen’s sensor location. 

from large, high-accuracy experts for server-side training and evaluation to compact, on-device variants capable of running on the pen’s MCU. The KIHT and “Towards the on-device re-construction” studies (253, 254) further refined this partitioning by exploring quantisation schemes and log-based multipliers, showing that mixed-precision implementations can preserve re-construction quality while fitting into realistic power budgets. Finally, the integration step for “writing on paper” crys-tallises the co-design loop. The IGS 2025 work showed that simply reusing tablet-trained models on paper data leads to a marked degradation, and that both the data pipeline (dual acqui-sition, noise filtering) and the model (domain adaptation, MoE specialisation) must be adapted to the new operating conditions. This adaptation was carried out (259, 254) while respecting the same hardware envelope, demonstrating how domain-shift han-dling and model compression cannot be treated separately in such a constrained system. More broadly, the Digipen use case exemplifies the pattern highlighted in recent co-design studies: only by jointly optimising sensing, embedded compute, com-munication and learning algorithms (255, 257) can one reach the global optimum of the system’s utility function – here, ac-curate, low-latency handwriting reconstruction on everyday pa-per, at scale. 

4.1.7. Results 

The digital pen project led to the development of a func-tional hardware–software demonstrator, validating the feasibil-ity of real-time trajectory reconstruction and on-device infer-ence under stringent embedded constraints. This proof of con-cept integrates the complete sensing front-end, the firmware pipeline ensuring temporally consistent acquisition, and a com-pressed TCN-based reconstruction model running within the limited memory budget of the microcontroller. The demonstra-tor confirms that accurate handwriting reconstruction is achiev-able even on everyday paper, closing the loop between sensing, embedded computation and learning algorithms. As summarised in Tab. 8, the optimized model meet strict energy, ROM and RAM constraints. The comparison with the baseline model highlights the progress achieved: com-pact architectures in the 11k parameter range fit within tens of kilobytes of memory while still delivering usable inference throughput, in contrast with the baseline model nearly two or-ders of magnitude larger which exceeds the memory envelope of the target MCU. Reconstruction quality was evaluated using the Fréchet dis-tance, a trajectory-level metric that captures both spatial align-ment and temporal consistency. As shown in Tab. 8, the op-timized model achieves a Fréchet distance of 0.2456, only marginally higher than the 0.2269 score of the much larger baseline. This small degradation illustrates that the proposed architecture preserves the essential of the pen trajectories while operating under tight energy and memory constrain. Qualitative examples in Fig. 53 further show that stroke ordering, curva-ture, and overall letter shapes are reliably reproduced, demon-strating the practical viability of the reconstruction pipeline on real writing data.                           

> Table 8: Comparison of Baseline and optimized models.
> Param. Baseline optimized TCN
> Kernel size 37Layer config. 100 /layer [15,5,10,20] Layers /stack 24Stacks 41
> Model size and compute
> Receptive field 49 181 Params 467k 10.9k MFLOPs 45.39 3.78
> Runtime and memory
> Throughput –0.61 s −1
> ROM 1850 kB* 66 kB RAM 144 kB* 74 kB
> Reconstruction quality
> Fréchet distance 0.2269 0.2456

Overall, the demonstrator validates the core thesis of the project: a deliberate hardware–software co-design process can unlock the necessary trade o ff s to embed machine learning-based handwriting reconstruction into a low-power, pen-sized device. The integration of compact temporal models, tailored sampling strategies, BLE-aware firmware and domain-adapted learning resulted in a system that is both deployable at scale and capable of delivering high-fidelity trajectories in real-world sce-narios. This proof of concept establishes a foundation for future iterations, including mixed-precision inference, lightweight ac-celerators, and extended on-device intelligence. 65 Figure 53: Some handwriting trajectory reconstruction using the optimised network. Illustration reproduced from Ref. (261) 

4.2. Industrial design of hardware w.r.t. model e ffi ciency 

Artificial neural networks (ANNs) in industry have been largely optimized around parallel matrix multiplication with floating- or low-precision activations. This has driven ac-celerator designs toward wide arrays and Tensor Cores, pri-oritizing throughput of dense (or structured-sparse) matrices at FP16 /BF16 /INT8 precision (262, 263, 264). In parallel, dataflow research shows that energy is dominated by moving 

activations /weights /partial sums rather than computing them, favouring architectures and loop nests that maximize on-chip reuse (265, 266, 267). Thus, "simpler" operations from a hu-man perspective, such as integer addition, are dominated by read /write operation latency, and are comparable in speed to same byte size float multiplication (264). In parallel, TinyML applications under hardware constraints, such as edge com-puting, require networks optimised for memory and process-ing constraints (268). To integrate findings from big data pro-cessing, knowledge distillation is used (269) with the goal to maintain performance while scaling down model size. How-ever, these approaches operate primarily under the assump-tion of frozen hardware, being limited in optimisation space to software-dependent parameters inspired by models and archi-tectures developed for TPU-accelerated computing. 

Event-driven alternatives. Spiking neural networks (SNNs) and event-based perception shift computation to asynchrony 

and binary events , with neuromorphic chips such as TrueNorth, Loihi /Loihi 2, SpiNNaker, and BrainScaleS illustrating the hardware advantages of sparse, time-coded processing and co-located memory /compute (270, 271, 272, 273, 274, 275). These platforms highlight a distinct point in the design space where model e ffi ciency stems from event sparsity and temporal cod-ing rather than purely from arithmetic precision. 

Is there a “missing middle” of operations?. Between dense FP multiply-accumulate (MAC)-heavy ANNs and event-driven SNNs lies a promising but under-explored region of operator and representation choices that mainstream chips underserve today. There are three main axes of optimisation that can be integrated in a co-design loop: 1. Precision: Recent ANN trends point towards reducing pre-cision as a design choice in parts of the network, e.g. int8 quantatizated inference (276), which can be further ex-plored in a hardware-software optimisation loop. 2. Operators: MAC and matrix multiplications in general are the dominating operations in ANNs, unlike the time-encoded operations of brain-inspired SNNs. 3. Temporal aspects: Virtually all ANNs are feedforward only at inference and time-agnostic, resulting in scaling issues in for instance continual learning and always-on sensing. Our brains and brain-inspired SNN hardware have time dependent activations and continuos analogue inputs, facilitating real-time strengthening of neurons in an always-on mechanism. There are existing works investigating one axis, though from a software-only perspective: 1. Adder /shift networks replace multiplications by absolute-di ff erence plus additions or bit-shifts, maintaining accu-racy while cutting energy substantially (277, 278); 2. bitwise networks approximate convolutions with XNOR +popcount (279); 3. structured sparsity (e.g. , 2:4) enables double-throughput tensor operations but requires training-time constraints and layout-aware compilers (263); 4. time-coded or continuous-time nets amortize precision over time steps, bringing them closer to event-driven ex-ecution and opening room for bit-serial datapaths (280). We posit that these families become truly competitive when 

co-designed with hardware whose primitive datapath is not 

a MAC: e.g. , L1-distance engines (abs +add), shift-add PEs, XNOR +POPCOUNT tiles, bit-serial accumulators, and event-aware NoCs. 

Co-design loop. Rather than developing models in isola-tion, we advocate a loop where model hyperparameters and hardware features are jointly optimized. Such a loop would optimise over data precision, : (1) Operator set O:{MAC, ABS +ADD, SHIFT +ADD, XNOR +POPCOUNT}; (2) Numeric set P: {FP32 /TF32 /BF16, INT8 /INT4, 1-bit}; (3) Temporal regime T : {frame-synchronous, event-driven, continuous-time}. Given a task D and constraints (latency /en-ergy /area), hardware-in-the-loop tools select ( o, p, t) ∈ O×P×T 

and train the network while measuring actual latency /energy on a simulator or dev board (281, 282, 283, 284). This closes the gap between FLOPs proxies and real hardware cost models. 66 4.3. Co-design in microbial metabolic modeling 

In industrial biotechnology, microbes and microbial commu-nities can be leveraged to convert feedstocks such as waste streams into value-added products. This bioconversion is en-abled by their inherent metabolic networks: the collection of intracellular enzyme-catalyzed chemical reactions that can vary substantially between di ff erent species. However, these bio-processes often operate far from their theoretical optimal per-formance. Important tools that can inform on how to opti-mize the productive performance of microbes in bioprocesses are constraint-based models of metabolism and their integra-tion with experimental measurements. A clear example is butyrate production by Clostridium butyricum , whose natu-ral metabolism (285) and pathway engineering (286) can be aided through computational flux models (287). Genome-scale metabolic models (GEMs) have been widely applied to in-dustrial organisms such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Es-cherichia coli for the production of fuels, chemicals, and bio-pharmaceuticals (288, 289, 290, 291). In this context, our ob-jective is to improve production of target compounds such as butyrate or polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB), while maintaining ro-bust growth and process stability. Experimental approaches such as fluxomics and metabolomics provide quantitative data to constrain and validate models (292, 293), whereas compu-tational tools help identify bottlenecks and missing metabolic pathways. Machine learning and large language models further accelerate this process by supporting annotation, gap-filling, and literature integration. Together, these elements form an it-erative co-design loop in which experiments refine models and models guide subsequent experiments (294, 295). 

4.3.1. Conceptual framework for bioprocess development 

Bioprocess optimization has traditionally relied on extensive experimental work. Because biological systems involve many interacting variables, approaches that vary one factor at a time are generally insu ffi cient. Design of Experiments (DoE) pro-vides a more systematic way to explore parameter interactions, although it still depends on prior assumptions and can require substantial experimental e ff ort (296, 297). Advances in genome sequencing have enabled the development of predictive models such as GEMs (298), which represent cellular metabolism as a network of biochemical reactions subject to physicochemical and environmental constraints (299). These models support hy-pothesis generation and help reduce experimental burden. De-spite this, GEMs remain incomplete and require iterative refine-ment, largely due to gaps or uncertainties in biological knowl-edge (300). Model reconstruction is therefore an ongoing pro-cess involving cycles of automated generation, curation, and validation, often informed by both literature and experimental data (297). This iterative refinement process highlights the lim-itations of purely manual approaches and makes GEM develop-ment well suited to co-design strategies supported by ML. 

4.3.2. Reconstruction Tools 

To address these limitations and reduce manual e ff ort, a range of tools has been developed for semi-automated and auto-mated GEM reconstruction. For example, CarveMe (301) and the DEMETER framework (302) generate draft models from genomic data, while other tools such as ModelSEED, RAVEN, and AuReMe rely on curated biochemical databases includ-ing KEGG and MetaCyc (303, 304, 305, 306, 307). In prac-tice, these approaches produce draft models that require fur-ther refinement through curation and simulation. Early meth-ods relied on optimization and flux-based analyses to detect inconsistencies such as dead-end metabolites (308), whereas more recent workflows incorporate structured curation proce-dures and large-scale reconstruction strategies (309). More re-cently, ML-based approaches have been introduced to prioritize refinement steps and identify high-impact corrections. For ex-ample, AMMEDEUS highlights reactions that strongly influ-ence model behavior (310), while Architect improves annota-tion quality (311). Emerging methods such as AlphaGEM fur-ther integrate deep learning and structural information to im-prove model completeness (312). Even with these advances, draft models must still be evaluated using constraint-based sim-ulations such as flux balance analysis (FBA) within the CO-BRA (Constraint-Based Reconstruction and Analysis) frame-work (292), highlighting the need for continued integration of complementary approaches, including LLMs. 

4.3.3. Automated Gap-Filling with Language Models 

One key challenge in this context is gap-filling, which iden-tifies missing reactions that prevent models from reproducing essential metabolic functions. Traditional approaches such as GapFind and GapFill (313) rely on constraint-based optimiza-tion and curated biochemical databases to add reactions re-quired for growth or metabolite production, which limits their ability to propose novel or context-specific reactions. LLMs off er a complementary strategy by leveraging unstructured bio-chemical knowledge from literature, annotations, and pathway descriptions. They can suggest plausible reactions, transport processes, or pathway variants that are not explicitly repre-sented in existing databases. This capability is consistent with earlier text-mining systems such as Argo (314) and more recent LLM-based annotation tools such as GeneWhisperer (315), as well as agent-based systems including GeneGPT and Ge-neAgent (316, 317, 318, 319). Combining constraint-based diagnostics with LLM reasoning provides an e ff ective way to identify and prioritize curation targets. Preliminary results in Clostridium butyricum suggest that such hybrid approaches can significantly reduce manual e ff ort by focusing expert at-tention on validation rather than discovery. Although not yet implemented in the current study, encoding reactions using SMILES representations o ff ers a promising extension, allow-ing LLMs to process biochemical transformations as structured sequences. This opens the door to sequence-based inference of missing substrates, products, or cofactors using transformer models developed for reaction prediction (320, 321). Over-all, LLM-guided gap-filling complements existing reconstruc-tion and refinement frameworks ( e.g. , DEMETER, Architect, AMMEDEUS), reducing manual bottlenecks and strengthening the integration between computational modeling and literature-derived biochemical knowledge (302, 311, 310, 322). 67 4.3.4. Hybrid ML–LLM Pipeline for GEM Curation 

To support scalable model refinement across large GEM cohorts, we developed a hybrid pipeline that combines ML-based diagnostics with LLM-driven reasoning (see Fig. 54). Constraint-based analyses identify key inconsistencies, includ-ing blocked reactions, dead-end metabolites, and abnormal ex-change behavior, while ML-derived features such as subsys-tem coverage, gene–rule completeness, and reaction preva-lence quantify deviations from expected metabolic organiza-tion across model cohorts. Rather than operating directly on full SBML files, the pipeline extracts a concise representation of high-value information, including the most a ff ected sub-systems, representative blocked reactions, dead-end metabo-lites, cohort-level reaction gaps, and ML-predicted candidates for reaction addition or removal. This structured summary is passed to the LLM via an automated Python interface using a strict JSON-based schema. The LLM interprets these di-agnostics by integrating curated biochemical databases ( e.g. ,AGORA, KEGG, MetaCyc) with broader literature-derived knowledge (323, 306, 307). The model then proposes tar-geted corrections, including transport processes, cofactor bal-ancing steps, or missing pathway components. Proposed mod-ifications are iteratively evaluated through simulation and com-parison with experimental data, improving agreement with ob-served phenotypes and flux distributions. LLM-derived sugges-tions can also be fed back into ML models, creating a feedback loop in which simulations detect inconsistencies, ML quanti-fies them, and LLMs provide biochemical interpretation. This integrated workflow supports continuous model refinement and improves predictive performance. 

4.3.5. LLMs in the Experimental–Computational Co-Design Loop 

Within this broader co-design framework, beyond the spe-cific pipeline described above, experimental data and com-putational models continuously inform one another. Flux-omics and metabolomics provide quantitative constraints, while GEMs and ML tools such as Medusa and AMMEDEUS identify discrepancies between predicted and observed behav-ior (324, 310). LLMs contribute by proposing biologically plausible model adjustments grounded in curated databases and literature. In the case of Clostridium butyricum , discrepan-cies between experimentally measured fluxes and FBA pre-dictions were addressed through ML diagnostics followed by LLM-guided refinement. Incorporating LLMs into this work-flow transforms GEMs from static reconstructions into adap-tive metabolic representations that evolve as new data accumu-late. As phenotypes are measured or environmental conditions change, LLMs can propose updated transporters, alternative pathways, and literature-supported revisions. Existing large-scale frameworks such as HumanGEM /THG already demon-strate the value of systematic curation (309), and LLMs ex-tend this capability by reasoning over unstructured biochemical knowledge. When combined with text-mining systems such as Argo (314), they can support multiple stages of the reconstruc-tion process, from annotation to validation, thereby improving alignment between in vivo metabolism and in silico models and enabling more reliable prediction for metabolic engineering ap-plications. 

4.3.6. Summary 

GEM curation is increasingly moving from manual, expert-driven workflows toward hybrid approaches that integrate auto-mated reconstruction, ML-based diagnostics, and LLM-driven reasoning. Within this co-design paradigm, experiments inform models, models guide experiments, and LLMs help translate biochemical knowledge from both structured and unstructured sources. This iterative loop supports the development of more predictive and adaptable metabolic models for biotechnology applications. 

4.4. Benchmarking and Optimization of Deep Feature Match-ers for Real-Time Applications 

We explore below the deployment of deep learning-based feature matchers in real-time computer vision pipelines, partic-ularly in environments constrained by edge hardware. Feature matching is a fundamental task in computer vision, essential for applications such as visual localization (325), SLAM (Simul-taneous Localization and Mapping), 3D reconstruction (326), scene understanding (327, 328), and augmented reality (329). In early years, feature matching primarily relied on hand-crafted descriptors. Methods such as Scale-Invariant Fea-ture Transform (SIFT) (330, 331), Speeded-Up Robust Fea-tures (SURF) (332), and Oriented FAST and Rotated BRIEF (ORB) (333) dominated the field for over a decade due to their robustness and e ffi ciency. More recently, state-of-the-art deep learning-based matchers such as SuperGlue (334) and Light-Glue (335) have significantly improved matching robustness and accuracy. However, their deployment in real-time and em-bedded systems is limited by computational complexity, la-tency, and memory requirements-constraints that are especially critical in edge scenarios. The objective of the study reported here is to benchmark and analyze the performance of SuperGlue and LightGlue across di ff erent hardware configurations. Although testing on the NVIDIA Jetson Nano was originally planned, outdated library versions and compatibility issues prevented successful execu-tion on this device. As part of future work, the benchmarking pipeline can be extended to newer Jetson platforms ( e.g. , Jetson Xavier or Orin), which o ff er updated software stacks and more capable hardware for deep feature matching. Key research questions include: 

• How do SuperGlue and LightGlue perform in terms of matching accuracy and runtime across various datasets? 

• How does the underlying hardware (CPU /GPU architec-ture, memory capacity, compute throughput) influence matcher performance? 

• Can lighter architectures such as LightGlue provide a vi-able accuracy-e ffi ciency trade-o ff on edge devices? 

• What do these findings imply for hardware-software co-design in practical deployment scenarios? 68 Figure 54: AI-Assisted Genome-Scale Metabolic Model (GEM) Curation Pipeline. This diagram illustrates the integrated hybrid ML–LLM co-design loop. Constraint-based diagnostics (blue) identify structural inconsistencies such as blocked reactions and dead-end metabolites. These signals, combined with Auto-GEM cohort statistics, are synthesized by an LLM-enhanced curation engine to provide biologically grounded gap-filling suggestions. The process is iteratively validated through in silico simulations (FBA /COBRA) and experimental bioreactor flux data, shifting the curation workflow from manual discovery toward automated, data-driven refinement (see Sec. 4.3, in particular Sec. 4.3.4). 

> Figure 55: Visual explanation of classical feature descriptor used for feature mapping

This use case provides a concrete example of a non-decomposable optimization problem, where matcher selection (software) and hardware characteristics must be evaluated to-gether to achieve optimal system behavior. A modular benchmarking framework was developed to eval-uate the performance of deep feature matchers across di ff er-ent datasets, hardware platforms, and runtime conditions. The framework is structured to ensure reproducibility, extensibility, and compatibility with both desktop and edge environments. The system consists of the following components: 

• Dataset loaders : Implementations for HPatches (336), MegaDepth (337), and ScanNet (338), providing stan-dardized preprocessing and pair selection. These datasets cover planar scenes, outdoor 3D environments, and indoor RGB-D scans respectively, enabling a diverse evaluation of matcher behavior. 

• Unified matcher interface : SuperGlue and LightGlue are wrapped under a common API that handles keypoint ex-traction, descriptor processing, and matching. This ab-straction ensures that both matchers can be evaluated un-der identical conditions. 

• Evaluation metrics: The framework computes a homog-raphy estimation error, a reprojection error, PCK-based ac-curacy metrics, and runtime (per pair latency). Runtime-specific information such as CPU utilization, GPU avail-ability, compute throughput, and memory footprint are recorded when supported by the target device. Although the framework was initially intended to run on the Jetson Nano, outdated library versions and compatibility is-sues prevented successful deployment. The design, however, remains fully compatible with newer Jetson devices, making the benchmarking pipeline adaptable for future evaluations on modern edge hardware. This modular architecture allows for a transparent compar-ison of matcher performance across platforms and facilitates extensions such as adding new datasets, integrating additional matchers, or profiling advanced hardware configurations. 69 Figure 56: Cross-platform runtime vs. PCK@3px comparison. 

The benchmarking results highlight the trade-o ff s between accuracy, e ffi ciency, and hardware constraints when deploy-ing deep feature matchers in real-time settings. SuperGlue consistently achieved the highest matching accuracy across all evaluated datasets, particularly in 3D environments such as MegaDepth and ScanNet. LightGlue, while slightly less ac-curate in some scenarios, demonstrated substantially lower la-tency. This e ffi ciency makes it more suitable for applications where real-time performance is critical; see Fig. 56. We note that runtime performance varied significantly across hardware platforms. On desktop GPUs, both matchers operated well within real-time bounds. However, SuperGlue’s compu-tational demands made it impractical for constrained devices. LightGlue, with its lighter architecture and reduced attention overhead, provided a more favorable accuracy–latency balance under limited compute resources. Due to outdated library ver-sions and incompatibilities, neither matcher could be bench-marked on the Jetson Nano as originally planned. This limi-tation emphasizes the importance of software stack support in embedded deployment. Future evaluations using newer Jetson devices ( e.g. , Xavier or Orin) are expected to yield more mean-ingful insights into edge performance. The experiments showed that matcher performance depends not only on architectural design but also on factors such as in-put resolution, available GPU memory, and CPU–GPU con-currency. These dependencies demonstrate that the hard-ware–software interaction plays a larger role in overall perfor-mance than model design alone. Overall, the results indicate that LightGlue provides a viable path for real-time operation on constrained devices, while Su-perGlue remains preferable when accuracy is prioritized and su ffi cient compute resources are available (Tab. 9). In conclusion, this study underscores the importance of eval-uating deep feature matchers within the context of their target hardware. The benchmarking results show that matcher selec-tion should not be made in isolation: accuracy, latency, and re-source usage are tightly coupled with hardware characteristics, making the problem inherently non-decomposable. SuperGlue delivers strong accuracy across diverse datasets but is di ffi cult to deploy on constrained platforms due to its computational demands. LightGlue o ff ers a more favorable bal-ance between e ffi ciency and performance, making it a viable candidate for real-time applications, particularly on edge de-vices. Although the Jetson Nano could not be evaluated due to outdated software support, the benchmarking framework re-mains compatible with newer Jetson architectures, providing a clear path for future experimentation. Overall, the presented benchmarking pipeline and analysis contribute to a practical understanding of hardware–software co-design for real-time vision systems. By jointly considering model behavior and deployment constraints, practitioners can make more informed decisions about matcher–hardware com-binations tailored to specific application requirements. 70 Metric i5 CPU Xeon CPU Xeon + V100 GPU 

Runtime (ms) LightGlue < SuperGlue LightGlue < SuperGlue LightGlue < SuperGlue PCK@3px Comparable Comparable LightGlue ≳ SuperGlue Median Error (px) LightGlue < SuperGlue LightGlue < SuperGlue LightGlue < SuperGlue Effi ciency (PCK@3px / runtime) LightGlue > SuperGlue LightGlue > SuperGlue LightGlue > SuperGlue 

> Table 9: Comparison of runtime and matching accuracy across hardware platforms highlights a key deployment trade-o ff : SuperGlue maximizes accuracy, while LightGlue significantly reduces latency, o ff ering a more practical solution for real-time systems.

4.5. LLM training Introduction. Here we wish to discuss the onset of strong hardware-software coupling in the training of LLMs in a man-ner that is grounded in the recent literature, addressing the inter-relation of model parameters, hardware parameters and data. Ignoring this inter-relation certainly leads to sub-optimal per-formance, as exemplified in Ref. (73). LLMs are usually deep neural networks with tens or hundreds of billions of parame-ters and training them is known to be computationally expen-sive (339). The scaling laws have shown that we need to optimize the hardware (especially for FLOPs (Floating-Point Operations per second), the training data size (or expressed as longer training duration) and the algorithm (with respect to model parameters). These factors form the scope of our use case discussion, includ-ing energy and CO2e (carbon dioxide emissions). Essentially, this use case shows that co-design leads to better model perfor-mance if there is (1) increased model size and hardware power or (2) increased model size and training data or (3) increased model size, hardware power and training data (74, 340, 75). The co-design ablation studies (based on scaling) with regards to the 3 main resources are confirmed in several papers, as es-tablished in this work. The main contributions of our use case discussion are two-fold: 1. We factor in the energy costs and CO2e for the projections from the scaling laws, which has not been done in previous studies (to the best of our knowledge). 2. We confirm that better model performance results from co-design through the relatively extensive literature survey. 

Method. To get insight from the literature about how co-design is treated in the LLM community, we followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) standard in surveying recent literature (341). The method consists of the following key steps. 1. We identified papers in two databases: Google Scholar and Scopus, using the search criteria (without case sensitivity): 

Optimal AND LLMs AND scaling AND law .12 Since so many papers were returned in the search, we limited our-selves to the initial 5 pages of results, due to time con-straint and since the most relevant papers appear in the initial pages (342). 

> 12 Conducted on 2025-09-26.

2. We removed papers based on the exclusion criterion of repetition or non-relevance by using the paper titles to as-sess. 3. Thereafter, we screened the remaining papers and again applied the exclusion criterion of repetition or non-relevance by using the abstracts to assess. 4. The final papers remaining in the review were then studied. We provide the CSV files of the papers for validation. 13 

Findings. Table 10 summarizes the results of the search. Most of the Scopus articles were review papers and many did not match our inclusion criteria. After careful review of the final 63 remaining papers, we observed that there are 3 main categories of the scaling laws. These are pretraining scaling, post-training scaling and test-time scaling (or long thinking) laws. We de-scribe each category in the sub-sections below. 

> Table 10: PRISMA search outcome

PRISMA Step Scholar Scopus 

Initial search results 26,100 914 Limitation to initial 5 pages 50 50 After removal - based on exclusion criteria or repetition in titles 47 36 Reviewed - After screening, based on exclusion criteria or non-relevance in abstracts 47 16 

Pretraining scaling. Papers that addressed the pretraining scal-ing generally identify that model performance improves but the scaling trend is becoming unsustainable (343, 344, 73). Some researchers have even introduced new scaling laws within this category (345, 346, 347). Ref. (348) proposed a unified frame-work for both dense and sparse models. The study in Ref. (349) went further and showed that jointly scaling the vocabulary and model sizes leads to e ffi cient performance. Finally, Ref. (350) introduced ByteScale for scalable LLM training for large-scale mixed training of long and short sequences. Further, Ref. (351) proposed an observational approach, which bypasses training, and instead creates scaling laws from about 100 publicly avail-able models, thereby showing that several emergent phenomena follow a smooth, sigmoidal behavior and they are predictable from small models. 

> 13 https: // drive.google.com /drive /folders /1lzlSf20rsEty0_KRMUswZka_ mUpuQa5S?usp =sharing

71 Table 11: Estimated optimal training FLOPs with energy costs and CO2e, extended from Ref.(73). 

Parameters FLOPs Tokens Energy (GWh) CO2e (t) 400 M 1.92e +19 8.0 B 0.27 MWh 0.11 1 B 1.21e +20 20.2 B 1.68 MWh 0.67 10 B 1.23e +22 205.1 B 0.17 0.07 K 67 B 5.76e +23 1.5 T 8.00 3.20 K 175 B 3.85e +24 3.7 T 53.47 21.39 K 280 B 9.90e +24 5.9 T 137.5 55.00 K 520 B 3.43e +25 11 T 476.39 190.56 K 1 T 1.27e +26 21.2 T 1,763.89 705.56 K 10 T 1.30e +28 216.2 T 180,555.56 72.22 M 100 T 1.30e +30 2162 T 18,055,555.56 7,222 M 

Post-training scaling. Ref. (352) explored the scaling laws for supervised finetuning (SFT) and Ref. (353) showed that scal-ing laws are task-dependent. The laws have also been investi-gated in other downstream tasks (354). Ref. (355) explored full model finetuning and parameter-e ffi cient finetuning (PEFT). Ref. (356) introduced a two-stage solution for predicting down-stream performance. Ref. (357) presented ParetoQ , comparing quantization settings of 1-bit, 1.58-bits, 2-bits, 3-bits, and 4-bits. 

Test-time scaling. The application of more compute at infer-ence in test-time scaling has been observed to improve accu-racy for reasoning models (346, 358, 359). Also, combin-ing smaller models with advanced inference algorithms o ff ers Pareto-optimal trade-o ff s in performance and cost. The study in Ref. (360) identified the strategy to accomplish such compute-optimal scaling as the one that chooses hyperparameters for maximal performance on a given prompt. There have been other works on post-training scaling (361). 

Discussion. Co-design is useful in many areas and it has been demonstrated that the same types of scaling laws for LLMs arise in world modeling and imitation learning though the co-effi cients are heavily influenced by the tokenizer, task and ar-chitecture (75). To achieve compute-optimal training, Ref. (73) further noted that equal scaling is required. This equal pro-portion is far more than what was earlier recommended by Ref. (362), who were of the view that very large model pa-rameters should go with modest data when coupling the design elements. It has also been observed that performance reaches saturation, especially if any of the elements is fixed while still increasing the other (362, 346). The general scaling law is given by Ref. (73) and expressed in the equation below, where N is the number of model parameters, D is the number of training to-kens, L is the final pretraining (cross-entropy) loss, and C is the hardware computation budget or FLOPs. Minimizing the loss consequently maximizes the utility function, which, for LLMs, may be evident in increased scores of di ff erent metrics, depend-ing on the task. 

Nopt (C), Dopt (C) = argmin L (N, D) . (70) In Tab. 11, we projected the extra row of 100 trillion param-eters, the energy column and the CO2e column from the orig-inal table in Ref. (73). We also provide the Bubble plots of the energy and CO2e in (base 10) logarithmic scale in Fig. 57 and Fig. 58, respectively. The projected FLOPs estimate, to-kens estimate, energy estimates, and CO2e estimates were cal-culated using the equations below. 14 The energy values were estimated with the assumption that training consumes 0.05 nJ per FLOP. The extensive demand for electricity by LLMs are linked to multiple factors like software, hardware, data center, power grid, and external societal factors (363). Given the en-ergy consumption per capita (11.9 GWh) and CO2e (37.77 Mt) in 2024 for Sweden 15 , we can observe that, for one year, one 175B model ( e.g. GPT3) consumed the energy of more than 4 Swedes and a single 5T model’s CO2e is roughly that of the whole country. Clearly, this represents a huge environmental challenge. 

> Figure 57: Bubble plot of energy in log10. (Bubble shapes merely indicative.)

FLOPs (100 T ) = 1.30 × 10 28 × (100 T/10 T )2

= 1.30 × 10 30 FLOPs , (71) 

T okens (100 T ) = 216 .2T × (100 T/10 T )

= 2, 162 T , (72) 

E(kWh ) = FLOPs × 5 × 10 −11 J/FLOP . . . 

× (1 /3.6 × 10 6)kWh /J , (73) 

> 14 CO2e based on the International Energy Agency projection.
> 15 https: // edgar.jrc.ec.europa.eu /country_profile /SWE&worlddata

72 Figure 58: Bubble plot of CO2e in log10. (Bubble shapes merely indicative.) 

CO 2e(kg ) = E(kWh ) × 0.4kg /kWh . (74) 

Benefits of Co-Design in LLM training. In training LLMs, sev-eral key factors play crucial roles, including model architecture, hardware, and data. Co-design enables us to ensure that these factors work synergistically to enhance various aspects, includ-ing environmental impact, e ffi ciency, scalability, and cost. We briefly discuss some benefits below. 1. Environmental Impact: Making LLMs more environmen-tally sustainable is very important as the models continue to grow in size and complexity. Hence, reducing the power needed to train a model or choosing a well-trained model (with fewer parameters) can lead to lowering carbon emis-sions. 2. E ffi ciency: Matching hardware strengths with software needs or model size with training data size, as was done by Ref. (73) in reducing model size and matching it with the right amount of tokens for a given compute budget, leads to e ffi ciency. This potentially reduces slowdowns. 3. Scalability: Adequate scalability can result from training di ff erently-sized models by ensuring both hardware and algorithms meet requirements. It helps support scaling across di ff erent settings and maximizes the use of avail-able resources. 4. Cost: Cost may be reduced by optimizing how the models utilize hardware, reducing training time, conserving en-ergy, and minimizing the use of excessive hardware. 

Use Case Limitations. We note that the projected 100 trillion estimate comes with uncertainty, like in previous work, and at an immense hardware computation budget, energy cost and CO2e. Also, it is uncertain if saturation will be reached before getting to this point. 

5. Concluding Remarks 

In this work we have considered the optimization of com-plex systems in scientific and industrial applications, focusing on the interplay between their hardware and software elements. In many of the scientific applications we discuss in Sec. 3 the problem can be cast under the guise of optimal measurement, which allows us to quantitatively assess to what degree the si-multaneous consideration of hardware and software in the op-timization procedures are necessary. In other systems such as those discussed in Sec. 4, where economic cost is the final util-ity, the quantitative advantage of co-design procedures in non-decomposable problems can also be assessed clearly. However, due to the demanding nature of complete optimization solu-tions, we can only produce quantitative estimates in selected use cases. In others, we discuss the conditions when co-design becomes important. In analytically tractable measurement models where the sta-tistical likelihood is explicitly known and e ffi cient estimators achieving the Rao-Cramér–Fréchet bound are available, system performance is determined primarily by the Fisher information of the hardware configuration. In such regimes, hardware de-sign and inference algorithms can often be optimized sequen-tially, since the optimal estimator is known and independent of the particular algorithm used to implement it. When stochastic complexity destroys this analytical tractability, however, the likelihood becomes implicit and inference must rely on approximate algorithms. In that case the achievable measurement precision depends jointly on hardware fidelity and software approximation quality. This coupling de-fines the regime where hardware–software co-design becomes necessary. In modern sensing systems the inference algorithm itself becomes part of the measurement apparatus, making hardware and software parameters inseparable components of the design space. The discussion of a breadth of scientific use cases encom-passing particle detectors, telescope arrays, tomography im-agers, and other apparatus at the forefront of experimental in-vestigation of fundamental science, as well as a few selected in-dustrial use cases in computer vision, natural language process-ing, chemical reaction modeling, and others, provides a cross-sectional view of the e ff ect of complexity of the systems on the optimization procedures that are required to improve their over-all performance. A few commonalities between these systems indicate what synergies can be leveraged for sharing of solu-tions, quicker development time, and better performance. Although co-design has been a topic of research for a few decades, it is only since the advent of deep learning and AI technologies that a deeper understanding of the most complex applications and a real possibility to achieve holistic optimiza-tion has become possible, with the concrete chance of obtaining full alignment of the di ff erent domains of design in systems at the highest levels in the complexity scale. As research in this area involves specific competences in computer science and sig-nificant investments –both in terms of development time and in terms of GPU resources, e.g. –, the scientific community needs to thwart the danger that only market-driven applications may benefit from the required AI solutions. Organized e ff orts by the scientific community are therefore advisable. One such ef-fort in Europe is the EUCAIF initiative, wherein this work was originally conceived. 73 Acknowledgments 

Nicolas Gauger, Alexander Schilling, and Tobias Kortus gratefully acknowledge the funding of the German National High Performance Computing (NHR) association for the Cen-ter NHR South-West. Luigi Favaro, Andrea Giammanco and Zahraa Zaher are supported by the Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique - FNRS under Grant No. 4.4503.16. The work of Xabier Cid Vidal and María Pereira Martínez is sup-ported by the Spanish Research State Agency under projects PID2022-139514NA-C33, PCI2023-145984-2 and EUR2025-164824; by the “María de Maeztu” grant CEX2023-001318-M, funded by MICIU /AEI /10.13039 /501100011033; and by the Xunta de Galicia (CIGUS Network of Research Cen-tres and project 2025-CP119). The work of María Pereira Martínez is supported by Xunta de Galicia under Pro-grama de axudas á etapa predoutoral Grant ED481A-2025-057. András Bóta has been supported by the Swedish Re-search Council through grant no. 2025-06617. Pietro Vis-chia’s work was supported by the “Ramón y Cajal” pro-gram under Project No. RYC2021-033305-I funded by the MCIN MCIN /AEI /10.13039 /501100011033 and by the Eu-ropean Union NextGenerationEU /PRTR. Pietro Vischia and Daniel Lanchares Álvarez gratefully acknowledge the use of the resources at the Artemisa computing infrastructure, funded by the European Union ERDF and the Comunitat Valenciana as well as the technical support provided by the Instituto de Fisica Corpuscular, IFIC (CSICUV). Ippocratis D. Saltas is funded by the Czech Grant Agency (GACR) under grant number 21-16583M. The views and opinions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European Commission. Neither the European Union nor the European Commission can be held responsible for them. Zlatan Dimitrov is supported by the GATE project under grant agreement No. 857155 and PRIDST 2021-2027 under grant agreement No. BG16RFPR002-1.014-0010-C01. 74 References 

[1] H. Fathy, J. Reyer, P. Papalambros, A. Ulsov, On the coupling between the plant and controller optimization problems, in: Proceedings of the 2001 American Con-trol Conference. (Cat. No.01CH37148), Vol. 3, 2001, pp. 1864–1869 vol.3. doi:10.1109/ACC.2001.946008 .[2] G. Karagiorgi, G. Kasieczka, S. Kravitz, B. Nachman, D. Shih, Machine learning in the search for new fun-damental physics, Nature Reviews Physics 4 (6) (2022) 399–412, publisher Copyright: © 2022, Springer Nature Limited. doi:10.1038/s42254-022-00455-1 .[3] G. Carleo, I. Cirac, K. Cranmer, L. Daudet, M. Schuld, et al., Machine learning and the physical sciences, Rev. Mod. Phys. 91 (2019) 045002. doi:10.1103/ RevModPhys.91.045002 .[4] J. R. R. A. Martins, A. Ning, Engineering Design Opti-mization, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2021. doi:10.1017/9781108980647 .[5] E. J. Cramer, J. J. E. Dennis, P. D. Frank, R. M. Lewis, G. R. Shubin, Problem formulation for multidis-ciplinary optimization, SIAM Journal on Optimization 4 (4) (1994) 754–776. doi:10.1137/0804044 .[6] J. R. R. A. Martins, A. B. Lambe, Multidisciplinary design optimization: A survey of architectures, AIAA Journal 51 (9) (2013) 2049–2075. doi:10.2514/1. J051895 .[7] L. Nolte, S. Tomforde, A helping hand: A survey about ai-driven experimental design for accelerating scientific research, Applied Sciences 15 (9) (2025). doi:10. 3390/app15095208 .[8] A. Baranov, E. Burnaev, D. Derkach, A. Filatov, N. Klyuchnikov, et al., Optimising the active muon shield for the SHiP experiment at CERN, Journal of Physics: Conference Series 934 (2017) 012050. doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/934/1/012050 .[9] C. Ahdida, A. Akmete, R. Albanese, J. Alt, A. Alexan-drov, et al., The ship experiment at the proposed cern sps beam dump facility, European Physical Jour-nal C 82 (5) (2022) 486. doi:10.1140/epjc/ s10052-022-10339-3 .[10] D. P. Bertsekas, Nonlinear Programming, 3rd Edition, Athena Scientific, Belmont, MA, 2016. doi:10.1057/ palgrave.jors.2600425 .[11] A. Beck, First-Order Methods in Optimiza-tion, SIAM, Philadelphia, PA, 2017. doi: 10.1137/1.9781611974997 .[12] B. Shahriari, K. Swersky, Z. Wang, R. P. Adams, N. de Freitas, Taking the human out of the loop: A re-view of bayesian optimization, Proceedings of the IEEE 104 (1) (2016) 148–175. doi:10.1109/JPROC.2015. 2494218 .[13] Z. H. Zhan, L. Shi, K. C. Tan, J. Zhang, A survey on evolutionary computation for complex continuous opti-mization, Artif. Intell. Rev. 55 (1) (2022) 59–110. doi: 10.1007/s10462-021-10042-y .[14] L.-G. Gagnon, Machine learning for track reconstruc-tion at the lhc, Journal of Instrumentation 17 (02) (2022) C02026. doi:10.1088/1748-0221/17/02/C02026 .[15] J. Rauch, Development of a track-fitting toolkit and analysis of d0 → π+ π- π+ π- at belle, Ph.D. thesis, Technische Universität München (2021). URL https: // nbn-resolving.org /urn:nbn:de:bvb: 91-diss-20210225-1577125-1-4 [16] X. Ai, C. Allaire, N. Calace, A. Czirkos, M. Elsing, et al., A common tracking software project, Comput-ing and Software for Big Science 6 (1) (2022) 8. doi: 10.1007/s41781-022-00078-8 .[17] S. Ha, J. Teich (Eds.), Handbook of Hardware /Software Codesign, Springer, Dordrecht, 2017. doi:10.1007/ 978-94-017-7267-9 .[18] CEED, CEED exascale discretizations, https: // ceed. exascaleproject.org, [Online; accessed 29-Aug-2025] (2025). [19] H. Lyu, Z. Pang, A. Bengtsson, S. Nilsson, A. J. Isaks-son, et al., Latency-Aware Control for Wireless Cloud Fog Automation: Framework and Case Study, IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng. (2023) 1–11TechRxiv 2022. 

doi:10.36227/techrxiv.22586044.v2 .[20] Y. Qiao, Y. Fu, M. Yuan, Communication–Control Co-Design in Wireless Networks: A Cloud Control AGV Example, IEEE Internet Things J. 10 (2023) 2346. doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2022.3211766 .[21] R. Yu, G. Xue, Principles and Practices for Application-Network Co-Design in Edge Computing, IEEE Net-work 37 (5) (2023) 137–144. doi:10.1109/MNET. 128.2200430 .[22] Y. Fu, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Lu, V. Boominathan, et al., SACod: Sensor Algorithm Co-Design Towards Effi cient CNN-powered Intelligent PhlatCam, in: 2021 IEEE /CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-sion (ICCV), Montreal, QC, Canada, 2021, p. 5148. 

doi:10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00512 .[23] W. Ahmad, B. M. Yildiz, A. Rensink, M. Stoelinga, A model-driven framework for hardware–software co-design of dataflow applications, in: Design, Modeling and Evaluation of Cyber Physical Systems, Vol. 10107 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, 2017, pp. 1–16. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-51737-3_1 .75 [24] L. Grosjean, J. Sachs, J. Ansari, N. Reider, A. H. Herranz, et al., A Framework for Communication-Compute-Control Co-Design in Cyber-Physical Sys-tems, Electronics 14 (5) (2025) 864. doi:10.3390/ electronics14050864 .[25] L. P. García, G. Furano, M. Ghiglione, V. Zancan, E. Imbembo, et al., Advancements in onboard process-ing of synthetic aperture radar (sar) data: Enhancing ef-ficiency and real-time capabilities, IEEE Journal of Se-lected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Re-mote Sensing 17 (2024) 16625–16645. doi:10.1109/ JSTARS.2024.3406155 .[26] C. Aybar, G. Mateo-García, G. Acciarini, V. R˚ užiˇ cka, G. Meoni, et al., Onboard cloud detection and atmo-spheric correction with e ffi cient deep learning models, IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Ob-servations and Remote Sensing 17 (2024) 19518–19529. 

doi:10.1109/JSTARS.2024.3480520 .[27] E. N. Evans, A. P. Kendall, E. A. Theodorou, Stochas-tic spatio-temporal optimization for control and co-design of systems in robotics and applied physics, Au-tonomous Robots 46 (1) (2022) 283–306. doi:10. 1007/s10514-021-10003-y .[28] G. Bravo-Palacios, H. Li, P. M. Wensing, Engi-neering compliance in legged robots via robust co-design, IEEE /ASME Transactions on Mechatronics 29 (6) (2024) 4711–4722. doi:10.1109/TMECH.2024. 3382305 .[29] N. Yu, F. Capasso, Flat optics with designer metasur-faces, Nat. Mater. 13 (2) (2014) 139–150. doi:10. 1038/nmat3839 .[30] M. Khorasaninejad, F. Capasso, Metalenses: Ver-satile multifunctional photonic components, Science 358 (6367) (2017) eaam8100. doi:10.1126/science. aam8100 .[31] Z. Li, P. Lin, Y.-W. Huang, J.-S. Park, W. T. Chen, et al., Meta-optics achieves RGB-achromatic focusing for vir-tual reality, Sci. Adv. 7 (5) (2021) eabe4458. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abe4458 .[32] M. K. Chen, C. H. Chu, X. Liu, J. Zhang, L. Sun, et al., Meta-lens in the sky, IEEE Access 10 (2022) 46552– 46557. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3171351 .[33] S. Thomas, J. G. George, F. Ferranti, S. Bhattacharya, Metaoptics for aberration correction in microendoscopy, Opt. Express 32 (6) (2024) 9686–9698. doi:10.1364/ OE.514870 .[34] G. Satat, M. Tancik, R. Raskar, Lensless imaging with compressive ultrafast sensing, IEEE Transactions on Computational Imaging 3 (3) (2017) 398–407. doi: 10.1109/TCI.2017.2684624 .[35] Y. Park, Y. Kim, C. Kim, G.-Y. Lee, H. Choi, et al., End-to-end optimization of metalens for broadband and wide-angle imaging, Adv. Opt. Mater. 13 (9) (Mar. 2025). 

doi:10.1002/adom.202402359 .[36] C. Roques-Carmes, K. Wang, Y. Yang, A. Majumdar, Z. Lin, Metaoptic computational imaging, ACS Pho-tonics (Feb. 2025). doi:10.1021/acsphotonics. 4c02266 .[37] D. K. Nikolov, A. Bauer, F. Cheng, H. Kato, A. N. Vami-vakas, et al., Metaform optics: Bridging nanophoton-ics and freeform optics, Science Advances 7 (18) (Apr. 2021). doi:10.1126/sciadv.abe5112 .URL http: // dx.doi.org /10.1126 /sciadv.abe5112 [38] C. Fanelli, Z. Papandreou, K. Suresh, J. Adkins, Y. Ak-iba, et al., AI-assisted optimization of the ECCE tracking system at the Electron Ion Collider, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 1047 (2023) 167748. doi:10.1016/j.nima.2022. 167748 .[39] M. Diefenthaler, C. Fanelli, L. Gerlach, W. Guan, T. Horn, et al., AI-assisted detector design for the EIC (AID(2)E), JINST 19 (07) (2024) C07001. doi:10. 1088/1748-0221/19/07/C07001 .[40] A. Akmete, A. Alexandrov, A. Anokhina, S. Aoki, E. Atkin, et al., The active muon shield in the SHiP experiment, Journal of Instrumentation 12 (05) (2017) P05011–P05011. doi:10.1088/1748-0221/12/05/ p05011 .[41] E. Cisbani, A. D. Dotto, C. Fanelli, M. Williams, M. Al-fred, et al., Ai-optimized detector design for the future electron-ion collider: the dual-radiator rich case, Jour-nal of Instrumentation 15 (05) (2020) P05009–P05009. 

doi:10.1088/1748-0221/15/05/p05009 .[42] S. Shirobokov, V. Belavin, M. Kagan, A. Ustyuzhanin, A. G. Baydin, et al., Black-box optimization with lo-cal generative surrogates, in: H. Larochelle, M. Ran-zato, R. Hadsell, M. Balcan, H. Lin (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 33, Cur-ran Associates, Inc., 2020, pp. 14650–14662. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2002.04632 .[43] S. Agostinelli, J. Allison, K. Amako, J. Apostolakis, H. Araujo, et al., Geant4 - a simulation toolkit, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research, Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associ-ated Equipment 506 (2003) 250–303. doi:10.1016/ S0168-9002(03)01368-8 .[44] J. Allison, K. Amako, J. Apostolakis, H. Araujo, P. A. Dubois, et al., Geant4 developments and applications, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 53 (1) (2006) 270–278. doi:10.1109/TNS.2006.869826 .76 [45] J. Allison, K. Amako, J. Apostolakis, P. Arce, M. Asai, et al., Recent developments in Geant4, Nuclear Instru-ments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 835 (2016) 186–225. doi:10.1016/j. nima.2016.06.125 .[46] M. Aehle, X. T. Nguyen, M. Novák, T. Dorigo, N. R. Gauger, et al., E ffi cient forward-mode algorithmic derivatives of Geant4 (2024). doi:10.48550/ARXIV. 2407.02966 .[47] K. Schmidt, K. N. Kota, J. Kieseler, A. D. Vita, M. Klute, et al., End-to-end detector optimization with di ff usion models: A case study in sampling calorimeters, Particles 8 (2) (2025) 47. doi:10.3390/particles8020047 .[48] T.Dorigo, A. Giammanco, P. V. et al., Toward the end-to-end optimization of particle physics instruments with di ff erentiable programming, Reviews in Physics 10 (2023) 100085. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j. revip.2023.100085 .URL https: // www.sciencedirect.com /science /article /pii /

S2405428323000047 [49] M. Aehle, L. Arsini, R. B. Barreiro, A. Belias, A. Boldyrev, et al., Progress in end-to-end optimization of fundamental physics experimental apparata with dif-ferentiable programming, Reviews in Physics 13 (2025) 100120. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.revip. 2025.100120 .URL https: // www.sciencedirect.com /science /article /pii /

S240542832500019X [50] F. Mokhtar, J. Pata, D. Garcia, E. Wul ff , M. Zhang, et al., Fine-tuning machine-learned particle-flow recon-struction for new detector geometries in future collid-ers, Phys. Rev. D 111 (2025) 092015. doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.111.092015 .[51] S. R. Qasim, P. Owen, N. Serra, Physics instrument design with reinforcement learning, Machine Learning: Science and Technology 6 (3) (2025) 035033. doi: 10.1088/2632-2153/adf7ff .[52] S. Zoccheddu, S. R. Qasim, P. Owen, N. Serra, Large language models for physics instrument design (2026). 

doi:10.48550/arXiv.2601.07580 .[53] R. M. Kulsrud, MHD description of plasma, in: M. N. Rosenbluth, R. Z. Sagdeev (Eds.), Handbook of Plasma Physics, Vol. 1, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1983, p. 115. [54] J. Payne, D. Knoll, A. McPherson, W. Taitano, L. Chacón, et al., Computational co-design of a multi-scale plasma application: A process and initial results, in: 2014 IEEE 28th International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium, IEEE, 2014, pp. 1093–1102. 

doi:10.1109/IPDPS.2014.125 .[55] B. M. Glinskiy, I. M. Kulikov, A. V. Snytnikov, A. A. Romanenko, I. G. Chernykh, et al., Co-design of parallel numerical methods for plasma physics and astrophysics, Supercomputing Frontiers and Innovations 1 (2014) 88– 98. doi:10.14529/jsfi140305 .[56] C. Vargas, C. Zorbas, G. R. Longworth, A. Ugalde, C. Needham, et al., Exploring co-design: a system-atic review of concepts, processes, models, and frame-works used in public health research, Journal of Pub-lic Health 47 (4) (2025) e616–e639. doi:10.1093/ pubmed/fdaf084 .[57] E. Fejzic, W. Usher, Stakeholder engagement for co-designing european climate and energy research prior-ities, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 215 (2025) 115574. doi:10.1016/j.rser.2025.115574 .[58] M. N. Marwaa, S. Guidetti, C. Ytterberg, H. K. Kris-tensen, Using experience-based co-design to develop mobile /tablet applications to support a person-centred and empowering stroke rehabilitation., Research In-volvement and Engagement 9 (1) (2023) 69. doi:10. 1186/s40900-023-00472-z .[59] B. Koirala, C. Benjasirisan, A. Lim, R. Moore, C. R. D. Himmelfarb, et al., Experienced-based co-design for car-diovascular and chronic disease research, European Jour-nal of Cardiovascular Nursing 24 (4) (2025) 652–658. 

doi:10.1093/eurjcn/zvae129 .[60] T. L. Dimopoulos-Bick, C. O’Connor, J. Montgomery, T. Szanto, M. Fisher, et al., “Anyone can co-design?”: a case study synthesis of six experience-based co-design (EBCD) projects for healthcare systems improvement in New South Wales, Australia, Patient Experience Jour-nal 6 (2) (2019) 93–104. doi:10.35680/2372-0247. 1365 .[61] N. B. Morris, J. F. Piil, M. Morabito, A. Messeri, M. Levi, et al., The HEAT-SHIELD project—perspectives from an inter-sectoral ap-proach to occupational heat stress, Journal of Science and Medicine in Sport 24 (8) (2021) 747–755. 

doi:10.1016/j.jsams.2021.03.010 .[62] D. Wemyss, E. Lobsiger-Kägi, S. Jud, F. Cellina, Lever-aging realities of saving energy at home: Contributions of co-design to behavioural interventions, Energy Re-search & Social Science 104 (2023) 103258. doi: 10.1016/j.erss.2023.103258 .[63] A. Fleming, E. Bohensky, L. X. C. Dutra, B. B. Lin, J. Melbourne-Thomas, et al., Perceptions of co-design, co-development and co-delivery (co-3d) as part of the co-production process–insights for climate services, Cli-mate Services 30 (2023) 100364. doi:10.1016/j. cliser.2023.100364 .77 [64] S. Bamberg, Changing environmentally harmful behav-iors: A stage model of self-regulated behavioral change, Journal of Environmental Psychology 34 (2013) 151– 159. doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2013.01.002 .[65] C. Guo, F. Cheng, Z. Du, J. Kiessling, J. Ku, et al., A Survey: Collaborative Hardware and Software Design in the Era of Large Language Models, IEEE Circuits and Systems Magazine 25 (1) (2025) 35–57. doi:10.1109/ MCAS.2024.3476008 .[66] M. Abdollahi, S. F. Yeganli, M. Baharloo, A. Bani-asadi, Hardware Design and Verification with Large Lan-guage Models: A Scoping Review, Challenges, and Open Issues, Electronics 14 (2025) 120. doi:10.3390/ electronics14010120 .[67] Z. He, Y. Pu, H. Wu, T. Qiu, B. Yu, Large Language Models for EDA: Future or Mirage?, ACM Transac-tions on Design Automation of Electronic Systems 30 (6) (2025) 1–53. doi:10.1145/3736167 .[68] S. Thakur, B. Ahmad, H. Pearce, B. Tan, B. Dolan-Gavitt, et al., VeriGen: A Large Language Model for Verilog Code Generation, ACM Transactions on De-sign Automation of Electronic Systems 29 (3) (2024). 

doi:10.1145/3643681 .[69] C. Xiong, C. Liu, H. Li, X. Li, HLSPilot: LLM-based high-level synthesis, arXiv preprint (2024). doi:10. 48550/arXiv.2408.06810 .[70] M. Abdelatty, J. Ma, S. Reda, MetRex: A Benchmark for Verilog Code Metric Reasoning Using LLMs, in: Proc. Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Con-ference (ASP-DAC ’25), Tokyo, Japan, 2025, pp. 995– 1001. doi:10.1145/3658617.3697625 .[71] M. Z. S. Khan, N. Mashnoor, M. Akyash, K. Azar, H. Kamali, SAGE-HLS: Syntax-aware AST-guided LLM for high-level synthesis code generation, arXiv preprint (2025). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2508.03558 .[72] S. Abi-Karam, C. Hao, HLS-Eval: A benchmark and framework for evaluating LLMs on high-level synthe-sis design tasks, arXiv preprint (2025). doi:10.48550/ arXiv.2504.12268 .[73] J. Ho ff mann, S. Borgeaud, A. Mensch, E. Buchatskaya, T. Cai, et al., Training compute-optimal large language models, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (NeurIPS 2022), 2022, pp. 23245–23258. 

doi:10.48550/arXiv.2203.15556 .[74] C. Wu, R. Tang, Towards a universal scaling law of llm training and inference, ScienceOpen Preprints (2024). 

doi:10.13140/RG.2.2.20147.64804 .[75] T. Pearce, T. Rashid, D. Bignell, R. Georgescu, S. De-vlin, et al., Scaling laws for pre-training agents and world models, arXiv preprint (2024). doi:10.48550/arXiv. 2411.04434 .[76] G. Abbiendi, Letter of Intent: the MUonE project, Tech. rep., CERN, Geneva, the collaboration has not yet a structure, therefore the names above are for the moment an indication of contacts. (2019). URL https: // cds.cern.ch /record /2677471 [77] T. Dorigo, Geometry optimization of a muon-electron scattering detector, Physics Open 4 (2020) 100022. 

doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physo.2020. 100022 .URL https: // www.sciencedirect.com /science /article /pii /

S2666032620300090 [78] R. L. Workman, et al., Review of particle physics, Prog. Theor. Exp. Phys. 2022 (2022) 083C01. doi:10.1093/ ptep/ptac097 .[79] M. Aaboud, et al., Study of the material of the atlas in-ner detector for run 2 of the lhc, JINST 12 (12) (2017) P12009. doi:10.1088/1748-0221/12/12/P12009 .[80] A. Tumasyan, et al., The phase-2 upgrade of the cms tracker, Tech. Rep. CERN-LHCC-2017-009, CMS-TDR-014, CERN, Geneva (2017). doi:10.17181/ CERN.QZ28.FLHW .[81] V. L. Highland, Some practical remarks on multiple scat-tering, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. 129 (1975) 497–499. doi: 10.1016/0029-554X(75)90743-0 .[82] R. Frühwirth, Application of kalman filtering to track and vertex fitting, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 262 (1987) 444–460. doi:10.1016/0168-9002(87)90887-4 .[83] W. Adam, R. Frühwirth, A. Strandlie, T. Todorov, Re-construction of electrons with the gaussian-sum filter in the cms tracker at the lhc, J. Phys. G 31 (9) (2005) N9– N20. doi:10.1088/0954-3899/31/9/N01 .[84] Electron and photon reconstruction and identification with the cms experiment at the cern lhc, JINST 16 (2021) P05014. doi:10.1088/1748-0221/16/05/P05014 .[85] R. Frühwirth, Track fitting with non-gaussian noise, Comput. Phys. Commun. 100 (1-2) (1997) 1–16. doi: 10.1016/S0010-4655(96)00155-5 .[86] Measurement of the w-boson mass in pp collisions at √s = 7 tev with the atlas detector, Eur. Phys. J. C 78 (2018) 110. doi:10.1140/epjc/ s10052-017-5475-4 .[87] G. Apollinari, I. Béjar Alonso, O. Brüning, P. Fessia, M. Lamont, et al., High-luminosity large hadron collider (hl-lhc): Technical design report, Tech. Rep. CERN-2017-007-M, CERN, Geneva (2017). doi:10.23731/ CYRM-2017-004 .[88] A mip timing detector for the cms phase-2 upgrade, Tech. Rep. CERN-LHCC-2019-003, CMS-TDR-020, CERN, Geneva (2019). URL https: // cds.cern.ch /record /2667167 78 [89] A high-granularity timing detector for the atlas phase-ii upgrade, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 1032 (2022) 166628. 

doi:10.1016/j.nima.2022.166628 .[90] H. F. W. Sadrozinski, A. Seiden, N. Cartiglia, 4d tracking with ultra-fast silicon detectors, Rep. Prog. Phys. 81 (2) (2018) 026101. doi:10.1088/1361-6633/aa94d3 .[91] ECAL 2010 performance results (2011). URL https: // cds.cern.ch /record /1373389 [92] D. R. Jones, M. Schonlau, W. J. Welch, E ffi cient global optimization of expensive black-box functions, Journal of Global Optimization 13 (1998) 455–492. doi:10. 1023/A:1008306431147 .[93] X. He, K. Zhao, X. Chu, Automl: A survey of the state-of-the-art, Knowledge-Based Systems 212 (2021) 106622. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j. knosys.2020.106622 .[94] T. Elsken, J. H. Metzen, F. Hutter, Neural architecture search: A survey, Journal of Machine Learning Research 20 (55) (2019) 1–21. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1808. 05377 .[95] G. Kasieczka, T. Plehn, M. Russell, T. Schell, Deep-learning Top Taggers or The End of QCD?, JHEP 05 (2017) 006. doi:10.1007/JHEP05(2017)006 .[96] Y. Wu, K. He, Group normalization, arXiv preprint (2018). arXiv:1803.08494 , doi:10.48550/arXiv. 1803.08494 .URL https: // arxiv.org /abs /1803.08494 [97] M. Balandat, B. Karrer, D. R. Jiang, S. Daulton, B. Letham, et al., BoTorch: A framework for e ffi -cient monte-carlo bayesian optimization, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33 (NeurIPS 2020), Curran Associates, 2020, pp. 21524–21538. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1910.06403 .[98] S. Daulton, M. Balandat, E. Bakshy, Di ff erentiable ex-pected hypervolume improvement for parallel multi-objective bayesian optimization, in: Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems 33 (NeurIPS 2020), Curran Associates, 2020, pp. 9851–9864. doi:10. 48550/arXiv.2006.05078 .[99] K. A. Wo´ zniak, S. Mulligan, J. Kieseler, M. Klute, F. Fleuret, et al., End-to-end optimal detector design with mutual information surrogates, Machine Learning: Science and Technology 6 (4) (2025) 045047. doi: 10.1088/2632-2153/ae1acb .[100] D. J. C. MacKay, Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2003. URL http: // www.inference.org.uk /mackay /itila /

[101] T. M. Cover, J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory, 2nd Edition, Wiley-Interscience, Hoboken, NJ, 2006. doi:10.1002/047174882X .[102] D. V. Aleksandrov, S. F. Burachas, M. S. Ippolitov, V. A. Lebedev, V. I. Manko, et al., A high resolution elec-tromagnetic calorimeter based on lead-tungstate crys-tals, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Re-search Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detec-tors and Associated Equipment 550 (1) (2005) 169–184. 

doi:10.1016/j.nima.2005.03.174 .[103] D. C. Sorensen, Newton’s method with a model trust re-gion modification, SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis 19 (2) (1982) 409–426. doi:10.1137/0719026 .[104] M. I. Belghazi, A. Baratin, S. Rajeshwar, S. Ozair, Y. Bengio, et al., Mutual information neural estimation, CoRR abs /1801.04062 (2018). doi:10.48550/arXiv. 1801.04062 .[105] U. B. de Almeida, The Southern Wide-Field Gamma-ray Observatory, Astron. Nachr. 342 (1-2) (2021) 431–437. arXiv:2012.13740 , doi:10.1002/asna. 202113946 .[106] T. Dorigo, M. Aehle, C. Arcaro, M. Awais, F. Berga-maschi, et al., Toward the end-to-end optimization of the SWGO array layout, Nucl. Phys. B 1017 (2025) 116934. arXiv:2310.01857 , doi:10.1016/ j.nuclphysb.2025.116934 .[107] T. Dorigo, SWGOLO: parametrization of muon and electron +gamma fluxes and utility-function mod-elling for SWGO array layout, GitHub repository, tdorigo /SWGOLO, CC0-1.0 license (2025). URL https: // github.com /tdorigo /SWGOLO [108] T. Dorigo, M. Doro, M. Aehle, M. Awais, N. R. Gauger, et al., On the utility function of experi-ments in fundamental science, Physics Open 23 (2025) 100270. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physo. 2025.100270 .URL https: // www.sciencedirect.com /science /article /pii /

S2666032625000201 [109] T.-P. Li, Y.-Q. Ma, Analysis methods for results in gamma-ray astronomy., The Astrophysical Journal 272 (1983) 317–324. doi:10.1086/161295 .[110] W. R. Thompson, On the likelihood that one unknown probability exceeds another in view of the evidence of two samples, Biometrika 25 (3 /4) (1933) 285–294. URL http: // www.jstor.org /stable /2332286 [111] R. S. Sutton, A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction, 2nd Edition, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2018. URL http: // incompleteideas.net /book /the-book-2nd. html 79 [112] Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA), CTA Observatory — offi cial website (2024). URL https: // www.ctao.org /

[113] K. Bernlöhr, Simulation of Imaging Atmospheric Cherenkov Telescopes with CORSIKA and sim_telarray, Astropart. Phys. 30 (2008) 149–158. arXiv: 0808.2253 , doi:10.1016/j.astropartphys.2008. 07.009 .[114] K. Bernlöhr, sim_telarray — Software for simulating Imaging Atmospheric Cherenkov Telescopes, MPI Heidelberg (2024). URL https: // www.mpi-hd.mpg.de /hfm /~bernlohr /sim_ telarray /

[115] M. Gaug, D. Berge, M. Daniel, M. Doro, A. Förster, et al., Calibration strategies for the Cherenkov Telescope Array, in: A. B. Peck, C. R. Benn, R. L. Seaman (Eds.), Observatory Operations: Strategies, Processes, and Sys-tems V, Vol. 9149 of Proc. SPIE, 2014, p. 914919. doi: 10.1117/12.2054536 .[116] M. Doro, The Commissioning and Characterization of the Calibration System of the MAGIC Telescopes, B.sc. thesis, University of Padova (2004). [117] T. Saito, M. Takahashi, Y. Inome, H. Abe, M. Artero, et al., Development and quality control of PMT mod-ules for the large-sized telescopes of the Cherenkov Tele-scope Array Observatory, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 1073 (2025) 170229. doi:10.1016/j.nima.2025.170229 .[118] Hamamatsu Photonics, Photomultiplier Tubes: Basics and Applications, 3rd Edition, Hamamatsu Photonics K.K., 2007. URL https: // www.hamamatsu.com /resources /pdf /etd /

PMT_handbook_v3aE.pdf [119] M. G. Aartsen, R. Abbasi, Y. Abdou, M. Ackermann, J. Adams, et al., First observation of PeV-energy neutri-nos with IceCube, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111 (2013) 021103. 

doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.111.021103 .[120] M. G. Aartsen, R. Abbasi, Y. Abdou, M. Ackermann, J. Adams, et al., Evidence for High-Energy Extrater-restrial Neutrinos at the IceCube Detector, Science 342 (2013) 1242856. doi:10.1126/science.1242856 .[121] M. G. Aartsen, R. Abbasi, Y. Abdou, M. Ackermann, J. Adams, et al., Neutrino emission from the direction of the blazar TXS 0506 +056 prior to the IceCube-170922A alert, Science 361 (6398) (2018) 147–151. doi:10. 1126/science.aat2890 .[122] M. G. Aartsen, R. Abbasi, Y. Abdou, M. Acker-mann, J. Adams, et al., Multimessenger observations of a flaring blazar coincident with high-energy neutrino IceCube-170922A, Science 361 (6398) (2018) eaat1378. 

doi:10.1126/science.aat1378 .[123] R. Abbasi, M. Ackermann, J. Adams, J. A. Aguilar, M. Ahlers, et al., Evidence for neutrino emission from the nearby active galaxy NGC 1068, Science 378 (6619) (2022) 538–543. doi:10.1126/science.abg3395 .[124] R. Abbasi, M. Ackermann, J. Adams, J. A. Aguilar, M. Ahlers, et al., Observation of high-energy neutri-nos from the Galactic plane, Science 380 (6652) (2023) adc9818. doi:10.1126/science.adc9818 .[125] S. Aiello, A. Albert, A. R. Alhebsi, M. Alshamsi, S. A. Garre, et al., Observation of an ultra-high-energy cosmic neutrino with KM3NeT, Nature 638 (8050) (2025) 376– 382, [Erratum: Nature 640, E3 (2025)]. doi:10.1038/ s41586-024-08543-1 .[126] S. Adrián-Martínez, M. Ageron, F. Aharonian, S. Aiello, A. Albert, et al., Letter of intent for KM3NeT 2.0, Journal of Physics G: Nuclear and Particle Physics 43 (8) (2016) 084001. doi:10.1088/0954-3899/43/ 8/084001 .[127] A. V.M., et al., Large neutrino telescope baikal-gvd: re-cent status, in: Proceedings of 38th International Cosmic Ray Conference — PoS(ICRC2023), ICRC2023, Sissa Medialab, 2023, p. 976. doi:10.22323/1.444.0976 .[128] M. Agostini, M. Böhmer, J. Bosma, K. Clark, M. Dan-ninger, et al., The pacific ocean neutrino experiment, Na-ture Astronomy 4 (10) (2020) 913–915. doi:10.1038/ s41550-020-1182-4 .[129] IceCube-Gen2 Collaboration, Icecube-gen2 technical design report, IceCube-Gen2 website, accessed: March 30, 2026(2023). URL https: // icecube-gen2.wisc.edu /science /

publications /TDR [130] S. Barwick, C. Glaser, Radio Detection of High En-ergy Neutrinos in Ice, Neutrino Physics and Astro-physics, World Scientific (2023). doi:10.1142/ 9789811282645_0006 .[131] J. Aguilar, P. Allison, J. Beatty, H. Bernho ff , D. Besson, et al., Design and Sensitivity of the Radio Neutrino Observatory in Greenland (RNO-G), JINST 16 (03) (2021) P03025, [Erratum: JINST 18, E03001 (2023)]. 

arXiv:2010.12279 , doi:10.1088/1748-0221/16/ 03/P03025 .[132] K. Cranmer, J. Brehmer, G. Louppe, The fron-tier of simulation-based inference, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 117 (48) (2020) 30055. doi:10.1073/pnas. 1912789117 .[133] M. L. Ravn, C. Glaser, T. Glüsenkamp, A. Özcelikkale, A. Coleman, Likelihood reconstruction for radio detec-tors of neutrinos and cosmic rays, arXiv preprint (2025). 

doi:10.48550/arXiv.2510.21925 .80 [134] M. Ravn, P. Pilar, C. Glaser, N. Wahlström, T. Glüsenkamp, Optimization pipeline for in-ice radio neutrino detectors, PoS MODE2025 (2026) 031. 

doi:10.22323/1.491.0031 .[135] P. Pilar, M. Ravn, C. Glaser, N. Wahlström, A dif-ferentiable surrogate model for the generation of radio pulses from in-ice neutrino interactions (9 2025). doi: 10.1088/2632-2153/ae4939 .[136] C. Haack, L. J. Schumacher, Machine-learning aided de-tector optimization of the Pacific Ocean Neutrino Exper-iment, PoS ICRC2023 (2023) 1059. doi:10.22323/1. 444.1059 .[137] C. Glaser, A. Coleman, T. Glusenkamp, NuRadioOpt: Optimization of Radio Detectors of Ultra-High Energy Neutrinos through Deep Learning and Di ff erential Pro-gramming, PoS ICRC2023 (2023) 1114. doi:10. 22323/1.444.1114 .[138] C. Glaser, et al., Nuradiomc: Simulating the radio emission of neutrinos from interaction to detector, Eur. Phys. J. C 80 (2) (2020) 77. doi:10.1140/epjc/ s10052-020-7612-8 .[139] J. Klimesch, Y. Drori, R. X. Adhikari, M. Krenn, Di ff er-ometor: A di ff erentiable interferometer simulator for the computational design of gravitational wave detectors, Tech. rep. (2026). URL http: // github.com /artificial-scientist-lab /

Di ff erometor [140] A. Berzins, A. Radler, E. Volkmann, S. Sanokowski, S. Hochreiter, et al., Geometry-informed neural net-works, in: Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning, 2025. doi:10.48550/arXiv. 2402.14009 .[141] D. Heck, J. Knapp, J. N. Capdevielle, G. Schatz, T. Thouw, Corsika: A monte carlo code to simu-late extensive air showers, Tech. Rep. FZKA-6019, Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe (1998). doi:10.5445/ IR/270043064 .[142] U. Fırat, N. Id, M. Doro, T. Dorigo, Optimization of the swgo array with gradient descent algorithms, Ph.D. the-sis, University of Padua, Department of Physics and As-tronomy “G. Galilei” (2025). URL https: // hdl.handle.net /20.500.12608 /92358 [143] D. E. Hyer, P. M. Hill, D. Wang, B. R. Smith, R. T. Flynn, E ff ects of spot size and spot spacing on lat-eral penumbra reduction when using a dynamic colli-mation system for spot scanning proton therapy, Physics in Medicine and Biology 59 (22) (2014) N187–N196. 

doi:10.1088/0031-9155/59/22/N187 .[144] L. Arsini, B. Caccia, A. Ciardiello, S. Giagu, F. Nicolanti, et al., Di ff erentiable autoplanning algorithm for proton therapy based on deep learning: A proof-of-concept, TechRxiv (Sep. 2025). [145] X. G. Xu, V. Taranenko, J. Zhang, C. Shi, A boundary-representation method for designing whole-body radia-tion dosimetry models: Pregnant females at the ends of three gestational periods—rpi-p3, -p6 and -p9, Physics in Medicine and Biology 52 (23) (2007) 7023–7044. 

doi:10.1088/0031-9155/52/23/008 .[146] X. Wang, F. Poenisch, N. Sahoo, R. X. Zhu, M. Lii, et al., Spot scanning proton therapy minimizes neutron dose in the setting of radiation therapy administered during pregnancy, Journal of Applied Clinical Medical Physics 17 (5) (2016) 366–376. doi:10.1120/jacmp.v17i5. 6298 .[147] P. Arce, D. Bolst, M.-C. Bordage, J. M. C. Brown, P. Cirrone, et al., Report on g4-med, a geant4 bench-marking system for medical physics applications devel-oped by the geant4 medical simulation benchmarking group, Medical Physics 48 (1) (2021) 19 – 56. doi: 10.1002/mp.14226 .[148] P. Arce, J. W. Archer, L. Arsini, A. Bagulya, D. Bolst, et al., Results of a geant4 benchmarking study for bio-medical applications, performed with the g4-med sys-tem, Medical Physics 52 (5) (2025) 2707 – 2761. doi: 10.1002/mp.17678 .[149] L. Arsini, B. Caccia, A. Ciardiello, A. D. Gregorio, G. Franciosini, et al., Fast dose distribution estimation for proton pencil beams with deep learning, Interna-tional Journal of Particle Therapy 12 (2024) 100341. 

doi:10.1016/j.ijpt.2024.100341 .[150] L. Arsini, B. Caccia, A. Ciardiello, A. D. Gregorio, G. Franciosini, et al., Fast and precise dose estimation for very high energy electron radiotherapy with graph neu-ral networks, Frontiers in Physics 12 (2024) 1443306. 

doi:10.3389/fphy.2024.1443306 .[151] N. Hansen, The CMA evolution strategy: A tutorial, arXiv preprint (2016). doi:10.48550/arXiv.1604. 00772 .[152] D. P. Kingma, J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, arXiv preprint (2014). doi:10.48550/ arXiv.1412.6980 .[153] B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, M. R. Aber-nathy, F. Acernese, et al., Observation of gravitational waves from a binary black hole merger, Physical Re-view Letters 116 (6) (2016) 061102. doi:10.1103/ PhysRevLett.116.061102 .[154] B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, M. R. Aber-nathy, F. Acernese, et al., Gw170817: Observation of gravitational waves from a binary neutron star inspi-ral, Physical Review Letters 119 (16) (2017) 161101. 

doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.119.161101 .81 [155] M. Maggiore, C. Van Den Broeck, N. Bartolo, E. Bel-gacem, D. Bertacca, et al., Science case for the ein-stein telescope, Journal of Cosmology and Astropar-ticle Physics 2020 (03) (2020) 050. doi:10.1088/ 1475-7516/2020/03/050 .[156] J. Aasi, B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. Abbott, M. R. Abernathy, et al., Advanced ligo, Classical and Quan-tum Gravity 32 (7) (2015) 074001. doi:10.1088/ 0264-9381/32/7/074001 .[157] F. Acernese, M. Agathos, K. Agatsuma, D. Aisa, N. Alle-mandou, et al., Advanced virgo: A second-generation in-terferometric gravitational wave detector, Classical and Quantum Gravity 32 (2) (2015) 024001. doi:10.1088/ 0264-9381/32/2/024001 .[158] P. Amaro-Seoane, H. Audley, S. Babak, J. Baker, E. Ba-rausse, et al., Laser interferometer space antenna, arXiv preprint (2017). doi:10.48550/arXiv.1702.00786 .[159] J. Veitch, V. Raymond, B. Farr, W. Farr, P. Gra ff , et al., Parameter estimation for compact binaries with ground-based gravitational-wave observations using the lalinfer-ence software library, Physical Review D 91 (4) (2015) 042003. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.91.042003 .[160] B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, S. Abraham, F. Ac-ernese, et al., Gwtc-1: A gravitational-wave transient catalog of compact binary mergers observed by ligo and virgo during the first and second observing runs, Phys-ical Review X 9 (3) (2019) 031040. doi:10.1103/ PhysRevX.9.031040 .[161] T. Robson, N. J. Cornish, C. Liu, The construction and use of lisa sensitivity curves, Classical and Quan-tum Gravity 36 (10) (2019) 105011. doi:10.1088/ 1361-6382/ab1101 .[162] G. Agazie, A. Anumarlapudi, A. M. Archibald, Z. Ar-zoumanian, P. T. Baker, et al., The nanograv 15 yr data set: Evidence for a gravitational-wave background, As-trophysical Journal Letters 951 (1) (2023) L8. doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/acdac6 .[163] J. Antoniadis, S. Arumugam, S. Babak, M. Bagchi-Antoniadis, et al., The second data release from the euro-pean pulsar timing array: Search for gravitational wave signals, Astronomy and Astrophysics 678 (2023) A50. 

doi:10.1051/0004-6361/202346842 .[164] A. Buonanno, T. Damour, E ff ective-one-body approach to general relativistic two-body dynamics, Physical Review D 59 (8) (1999) 084006. doi:10.1103/ PhysRevD.59.084006 .[165] L. Blanchet, Gravitational radiation from post-newtonian sources and inspiralling compact binaries, Living Re-views in Relativity 17 (1) (2014) 2. doi:10.12942/ lrr-2014-2 .[166] S. Husa, S. Khan, M. Hannam, M. Pürrer, F. Ohme, et al., Frequency-domain gravitational waves from nonprecess-ing black-hole binaries, Physical Review D 93 (4) (2016) 044006. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.93.044006 .[167] B. Allen, χ2 time-frequency discriminator for gravita-tional wave detection, Physical Review D 71 (6) (2005) 062001. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.71.062001 .[168] J. C. Driggers, S. Vitale, A. P. Lundgren, M. Evans, K. Kawabe, et al., Improving astrophysical parameter es-timation via o ffl ine noise subtraction for advanced ligo, Physical Review D 99 (4) (2019) 042001. doi:10. 1103/PhysRevD.99.042001 .[169] J. W. Armstrong, F. B. Estabrook, M. Tinto, Time-delay interferometry for space-based gravitational wave searches, Astrophysical Journal 527 (2) (1999) 814. 

doi:10.1086/308110 .[170] M. Tinto, S. V. Dhurandhar, Time-delay interferometry, Living Reviews in Relativity 24 (1) (2021) 1. doi:10. 1007/s41114-020-00033-0 .[171] J.-B. Bayle, M. Lilley, A. Petiteau, H. Halloin, E ff ect of filters on the time-delay interferometry residual laser noise for lisa, Physical Review D 99 (8) (2019) 084023. 

doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.99.084023 .[172] J. Aasi, J. Abadie, B. P. Abbott, R. Abbott, T. D. Abbott, et al., Enhanced sensitivity of the ligo gravitational wave detector by using squeezed states of light, Nature Pho-tonics 7 (8) (2013) 613–619. doi:10.1038/nphoton. 2013.177 .[173] M. Tse, H. Yu, N. Kijbunchoo, A. Fernandez-Galiana, P. Dupej, et al., Quantum-enhanced advanced ligo detec-tors in the era of gravitational-wave astronomy, Physical Review Letters 123 (23) (2019) 231107. doi:10.1103/ PhysRevLett.123.231107 .[174] L. McCuller, C. Whittle, D. Ganapathy, K. Komori, M. Tse, et al., Frequency-dependent squeezing for ad-vanced ligo, Physical Review Letters 124 (17) (2020) 171102. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.124.171102 .[175] M. Punturo, M. Abernathy, F. Acernese, B. Allen, N. An-dersson, et al., The einstein telescope: A third-generation gravitational wave observatory, Classical and Quan-tum Gravity 27 (19) (2010) 194002. doi:10.1088/ 0264-9381/27/19/194002 .[176] M. Maggiore, C. V. D. Broeck, N. Bartolo, E. Belgacem, D. Bertacca, et al., Science case for the einstein tele-scope, Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics 2020 (03) (2020) 050. doi:10.1088/1475-7516/ 2020/03/050 .[177] J. Harms, Terrestrial gravity fluctuations, Living Re-views in Relativity 18 (1) (2015) 3. doi:10.1007/ lrr-2015-3 .82 [178] F. Badaracco, J. Harms, Machine learning for gravitational-wave detection: Surrogate wiener filtering for the prediction and optimized can-cellation of newtonian noise at virgo, Classical and Quantum Gravity 36 (14) (2019) 145006. 

doi:10.1088/1361-6382/ab1e5b .[179] R. X. Adhikari, K. Arai, A. F. Brooks, C. Wipf, O. Aguiar, et al., A cryogenic silicon interferometer for gravitational-wave detection, Classical and Quan-tum Gravity 37 (16) (2020) 165003. doi:10.1088/ 1361-6382/ab9143 .[180] A. H. Nitz, T. Dal Canton, D. Davis, S. Reyes, Rapid detection of gravitational waves from compact binary mergers with pycbc live, Physical Review D 98 (2) (2018) 024050. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.98.024050 .[181] D. Davis, J. S. Areeda, B. K. Berger, R. Bruntz, A. Ef-fler, et al., Ligo detector characterization in the second and third observing runs, Classical and Quantum Grav-ity 38 (13) (2021) 135014. doi:10.1088/1361-6382/ abfd85 .[182] M. Zevin, S. Coughlin, S. Bahaadini, E. Besler, N. Ro-hani, et al., Gravity spy: Integrating advanced ligo de-tector characterization, machine learning, and citizen science, Classical and Quantum Gravity 34 (6) (2017) 064003. doi:10.1088/1361-6382/aa5cea .[183] E. Cuoco, J. Powell, M. Cavaglià, K. Ackley, M. Bejger, et al., Enhancing gravitational-wave science with ma-chine learning, Machine Learning: Science and Technol-ogy 2 (1) (2021) 011002. doi:10.1088/2632-2153/ abc408 .[184] A. J. K. Chua, C. R. Galley, M. Vallisneri, Reduced-order modeling with artificial neurons for gravitational-wave inference, Physical Review Letters 122 (21) (2019) 211101. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.211101 .[185] M. Williams, J. Veitch, C. Messenger, Nested sam-pling with normalizing flows for gravitational-wave in-ference, Phys. Rev. D 103 (2021) 103006. doi:10. 1103/PhysRevD.103.103006 .[186] S. Bose, S. Ghosh, P. Ajith, Systematic errors in mea-suring parameters of non-spinning compact binary coa-lescences with post-newtonian templates, Classical and Quantum Gravity 27 (11) (2010) 114001. doi:10. 1088/0264-9381/27/11/114001 .[187] G. Vajente, Y. Huang, M. Isi, J. C. Driggers, Kissel, et al., Machine-learning nonstationary noise out of gravitational-wave detectors, Phys. Rev. D 101 (2020) 042003. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.101.042003 .[188] E. Brochu, V. M. Cora, N. de Freitas, A tutorial on bayesian optimization of expensive cost functions, with application to active user modeling and hierarchical re-inforcement learning, arXiv preprint (2010). doi:10. 48550/arXiv.1012.2599 .[189] K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, T. Meyarivan, A fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm: Nsga-ii, IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 6 (2) (2002) 182–197. doi:10.1109/4235.996017 .[190] M. Box, A new method of constrained optimization and a comparison with other methods, The Computer Journal 8 (1) (1965) 42–52. doi:10.1093/comjnl/8.1.42 .[191] A. Homaifar, C. Qi, S. Lai, Constrained optimization via genetic algorithms, SIMULATION 62 (4) (1994) 242– 253. doi:10.1177/003754979406200405 .[192] J. Kotary, F. Fioretto, P. V. Hentenryck, B. Wilder, End-to-end constrained optimization learning: A survey (2021). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2103.16378 .[193] R. Fletcher, Penalty functions, in: A. Bachem, M. Grötschel, B. Korte (Eds.), Mathematical Pro-gramming: The State of the Art, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1983, pp. 87–114. doi:10.1007/ 978-3-642-68874-4_5 .[194] W. Lillo, M. Loh, S. Hui, S. Zak, On solving con-strained optimization problems with neural networks: a penalty method approach, IEEE Transactions on Neu-ral Networks 4 (6) (1993) 931–940. doi:10.1109/72. 286888 .[195] LIGO Scientific Collaboration, Gwinc (gravitational wave interferometer noise calculator) (2020). URL https: // gwinc.docs.ligo.org /pygwinc /

[196] R. Brun, F. Rademakers, Root: An object oriented data analysis framework, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 389 (1997) 81. doi:10.1016/S0168-9002(97)00048-X .[197] P. Vontobel, E. H. Lehmann, R. Hassanein, G. Frei, Neutron tomography: Method and applications, Physica B: Condensed Matter 385-386 (2006) 475–480. doi: 10.1016/j.physb.2006.05.252 .[198] M. P. Martínez, X. C. Vidal, P. Vischia, Automatic opti-mization of a parallel-plate avalanche counter with op-tical readout, Particles 8 (1) (2025). doi:10.3390/ particles8010026 .[199] M. Cortesi, Y. Ayyad, J. Yurkon, Development of a parallel-plate avalanche counter with optical readout (o-ppac), Journal of Instrumentation 13 (10) (2018) P10006. doi:10.1088/1748-0221/13/10/P10006 .[200] T. Akiba, S. Sano, T. Yanase, T. Ohta, M. Koyama, Optuna: A next-generation hyperparameter optimiza-tion framework, CoRR abs /1907.10902 (2019). doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1907.10902 .83 [201] D. P. Kingma, J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic op-timization (2017). doi:10.48550/arXiv.1412.6980 .[202] H. K. M. Tanaka, C. Bozza, A. Bross, E. Can-toni, O. Catalano, et al., Muography, Nature Reviews Methods Primers 3 (1) (2023) 88. doi:10.1038/ s43586-023-00239-4 .[203] L. Bonechi, R. D’Alessandro, A. Giammanco, Atmo-spheric muons as an imaging tool, Rev. Phys. 5 (2020) 100038. doi:10.1016/j.revip.2020.100038 .[204] International Atomic Energy Agency, Muon imaging: Present status and emerging applications, IAEA TEC-DOC 2012, IAEA, Vienna (2022). URL https: // www.iaea.org /publications /15182 /

muon-imaging [205] G. Strong, M. Lagrange, A. Orio, A. Bordignon, F. Bury, et al., TomOpt: di ff erential optimisation for task- and constraint-aware design of particle detectors in the con-text of muon tomography, Mach. Learn. Sci. Tech. 5 (3) (2024) 035002. doi:10.1088/2632-2153/ad52e7 .[206] Z. Zaher, M. Lagrange, S. Alvarez, G. C. Strong, F. Bury, et al., Optimisation of muon portals for border controls using TomOpt, Transactions on Maritime Science 14 (3) (2025) 3. doi:10.7225/toms.v14.n03.w01 .[207] Z. Zaher, S. Alvarez, T. Dorigo, A. Giammanco, M. La-grange, et al., Optimisation of muon tomography scan-ners for border control using TomOpt, Particles 8 (2) (2025) 53. doi:10.3390/particles8020053 .[208] Z. Zaher, H. Lay, T. Dorigo, A. Giammanco, V. Gu-lik, et al., Optimization of a cosmic muon tomogra-phy scanner for cargo border control inspection, Jour-nal of Applied Physics 138 (19) (2025) 194903. doi: 10.1063/5.0251424 .[209] W. Woodley, A. Fedynitch, M.-C. Piro, Cosmic ray muons in laboratories deep underground, Phys. Rev. D 110 (6) (2024) 063006. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.110. 063006 .[210] A. Fedynitch, R. Engel, T. K. Gaisser, F. Riehn, T. Stanev, Calculation of conventional and prompt lepton fluxes at very high energy, EPJ Web of Conferences 99 (2015) 08001. doi:10.1051/epjconf/20159908001 .[211] F. Riehn, R. Engel, A. Fedynitch, T. K. Gaisser, T. Stanev, The hadronic interaction model sibyll 2.3c and feynman scaling, Proceedings of Science (ICRC2017) 301 (2017) 301. doi:10.22323/1.301.0301 .[212] T. K. Gaisser, Spectrum of cosmic-ray nucle-ons, kaon production, and the atmospheric muon charge ratio, Astroparticle Physics 35 (12) (2012) 801–806. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j. astropartphys.2012.02.010 .[213] R. L. Workman, V. D. Burkert, V. Crede, E. Klempt, U. Thoma, et al., Review of Particle Physics, PTEP 2022 (2022) 083C01. doi:10.1093/ptep/ptac097 .[214] K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, T. Meyarivan, A fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm: Nsga-ii, IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 6 (2) (2002) 182–197. doi:10.1109/4235.996017 .[215] K. Deb, H. Jain, An evolutionary many-objective op-timization algorithm using reference-point-based non-dominated sorting approach, part i: Solving problems with box constraints, IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 18 (4) (2014) 577–601. doi:10.1109/ TEVC.2013.2281535 .[216] H. Seada, K. Deb, A unified evolutionary optimiza-tion procedure for single, multiple, and many objectives, IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 20 (3) (2016) 358–369. doi:10.1109/TEVC.2015.2459718 .[217] W. Priedhorsky, K. Borozdin, G. Hogan, C. Morris, A. Saunders, et al., Detection of high-z objects us-ing multiple scattering of cosmic ray muons, Review of Scientific Instruments 74 (2003) 4294–4297. doi: 10.1063/1.1606536 .[218] S. Chatzidakis, C. Choi, L. Tsoukalas, Analysis of spent nuclear fuel imaging using multiple coulomb scattering of cosmic muons, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Sci-ence 63 (2016) 2866–2874. doi:10.1109/TNS.2016. 2618009 .[219] D. Pagano, G. Bonomi, A. Donzella, A. Zenoni, G. Zumerle, et al., Ecomug: An e ffi cient cosmic muon generator for cosmic-ray muon applications, Nuclear In-struments and Methods in Physics Research, Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associ-ated Equipment 1014 (2021) 165732. doi:10.1016/j. nima.2021.165732 .[220] D. Pagano, G. Bonomi, A. Donzella, A. Zenoni, N. Zurlo, Update on ecomug cosmic-ray muon genera-tor, 2023. URL https: // indico.cern.ch /event /1203839 /

contributions /5332762 /

[221] M. Lagrange, A. Orio, Co-design: Muon scattering tomography study (2025). URL https: // github.com /MaximeLagrange /CoDesign /

tree /Aitor [222] A. Orio, Tools and procedure for post-simulation co-design of scattering muography systems (2025). URL https: // github.com /MaximeLagrange /muograph /

blob /Aitor /Analysis.ipynb [223] M. Lagrange, Muograph: muon tomography library (2025). URL https: // github.com /MaximeLagrange /muograph /

tree /main 84 [224] A. Anker, P. Baldi, S. Barwick, J. Beise, D. Besson, et al., Improving sensitivity of the ARIANNA detector by rejecting thermal noise with deep learning, JINST 17 (03) (2022) P03007. doi:10.1088/1748-0221/ 17/03/P03007 .[225] A. Coleman, C. Glaser, J. Aguilar, P. Allison, D. Besson, et al., Enhancing the Sensitivity of RNO-G Using a Machine-learning Based Trigger, PoS ICRC2023 (2023) 1100. doi:10.22323/1.444.1100 .[226] J.-F. Schulte, B. Ramhorst, C. Sun, J. Mitrevski, et al., hls4ml: A flexible, open-source platform for deep learn-ing acceleration on reconfigurable hardware (2025). 

doi:10.48550/arXiv.2512.01463 .[227] A. Gandrakota, Realtime anomaly detection at the l1 trigger of cms experiment, PoS ICHEP2024 (2025) 1025. doi:10.22323/1.476.1025 .[228] F. Vaselli, M. Pierini, M. M. Glowacki, T. Aarrestad, K. Govorkova, et al., It’s not a fad: First results in us-ing flows for unsupervised anomaly detection at 40 mhz at the large hadron collider (2025). doi:10.48550/ arXiv.2508.11594 .[229] W. Jiang, X. Zhang, E. H.-M. Sha, L. Yang, Q. Zhuge, et al., Accuracy vs. e ffi ciency: Achieving both through fpga-implementation aware neural architecture search, arXiv (2019). doi:10.48550/arXiv.1901.11211 .[230] C. Sun, T. K. A. rrestad, V. Loncar, J. Ngadiuba, M. Spiropulu, Hgq: High granularity quantization for real-time neural networks on fpgas, arXiv (2024). doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2405.00645 .[231] B. Knuteson, Systematic analysis of hep collider data, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 534 (1) (2004) 7–14, proceed-ings of the IXth International Workshop on Advanced Computing and Analysis Techniques in Physics Re-search. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nima. 2004.07.050 .URL https: // www.sciencedirect.com /science /article /pii /

S0168900204014731 [232] V. Belis, P. Odagiu, T. K. Aarrestad, Machine learning for anomaly detection in particle physics, Phys. Rept. 1068 (2024) 1–89. doi:10.1016/j.revip.2024. 100091 .[233] A. D’Avanzo, Unsupervised machine learning for anomaly detection in collider searches, sciPost Physics Proceedings, in preparation (2025). arXiv:2509. 24723 .[234] CERN, Cern documentation management system: How will be used for hl, in: HL-LHC Standards and Best Practices Workshop, CERN, Geneva, Switzerland, 2014, consultato il: March 30, 2026. URL https: // indico.cern.ch /event /302808 /contributions /

1667982 /

[235] CERN, Document management landscape and guide-lines, CERN Document Server (CDS), approved by the Steering Group on Externally Provided Software, Systems, Hardware and Services (STEPS) (Oct 2024). URL https: // cds.cern.ch /record /2921130 /files /

Document%20Management%20Landscape%20and% 20Guidelines%201.0.pdf [236] J. Wuttke, S. Cottrell, M. A. Gonzalez, et al., Guide-lines for collaborative development of sustainable data treatment software, Journal of Neutron Research 24 (1) (2022) 33–72. doi:10.3233/JNR-220002 .[237] H. Wang, J. Gong, H. Zhang, J. Xu, Z. Wang, Ai agen-tic programming: A survey of techniques, challenges, and opportunities, arXiv preprint (2025). arXiv:2508. 11126 .URL https: // arxiv.org /abs /2508.11126 [238] S. Raza, R. Sapkota, M. Karkee, C. Emmanouilidis, Trism for agentic ai: A review of trust, risk, and security management in llm-based agentic multi-agent systems, arXiv preprint (2025). arXiv:2506.04133 .URL https: // arxiv.org /abs /2506.04133 [239] R. Pane, L’impatto degli strumenti genai sullo sviluppo software: evoluzione, rischi ed opportunità, Ph.D. the-sis, Politecnico di Torino, english title: The impact of GenAI tools on software development: evolution, risks, and opportunities (2025). [240] A. J. Ballard, R. Das, S. Martiniani, D. Mehta, et al., Energy landscapes for machine learning, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 19 (20) (2017) 12585–12603. doi:10. 1039/C7CP01108C .[241] Y. Zhang, Q. Dong, Empirical investigation of latent representational dynamics in large language models: A manifold evolution perspective (2025). doi:10.48550/ arXiv.2505.20340 .[242] S. Z. Shen, H. Lang, B. Wang, Y. Kim, D. Sontag, Learn-ing to decode collaboratively with multiple language models (2024). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2403.03870 .[243] Microsoft, Augment LLMs with RAGs or fine-tuning, https: // learn.microsoft.com /en-us /azure /developer /ai /

augment-llm-rag-fine-tuning (Jan 2026). [244] B. Pingua, et al., Medical LLMs: Fine-tuning vs. retrieval-augmented generation, Bioengi-neering 12 (7) (2025) 687. doi:10.3390/ bioengineering12070687 .[245] IBM, Rag vs. fine-tuning, https: // www.ibm.com /think /

topics /rag-vs-fine-tuning (Aug 2024). 85 [246] A. Balaguer, V. Benara, R. L. d. F. Cunha, R. d. M. E. Filho, T. Hendry, et al., Rag vs fine-tuning: Pipelines, tradeo ff s, and a case study on agriculture, arXiv preprint (2024). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2401.08406 .[247] M. De Miliani, Understanding LLM performance degradation: A deep dive into context window limits, Blog post (Nov 2025). URL https: // demiliani.com /2025 /11 /02 /

understanding-llm-performance-degradation-a-deep-dive-into-context-window-limits /

[248] DataAnnotation.tech, Context windows explained: How token limits shape AI performance, https: 

// www.dataannotation.tech /blog /llm-context-window (Jan 2026). [249] K. Horikawa, H. Li, Y. Kashiwa, B. Adams, H. Iida, et al., Agentic refactoring: An empirical study of ai coding agents, arXiv preprint (2025). doi:10.48550/ arXiv.2511.04824 .[250] K. Wali, Hardware-software co-design for power-effi cient edge-ai systems, Journal of Artificial Intelli-gence, Machine Learning and Data Science 2 (4) (2024) 2754–2760. doi:10.51219/JAIMLD/karthik-wali/ 580 .[251] R. Etemadi Idgahi, Quality-driven multi-objective opti-mization of software architecture design: Method, tool, and application, Phd thesis, Universiteit Leiden, consul-tato il: March 30, 2026(Dec 2014). URL https: // hdl.handle.net /1887 /30105 [252] T. Harbaum, A. Serdyuk, F. Kreß, T. Hamann, J. Barth, et al., Kiht: Kaligo-based intelligent handwriting teacher, in: 2024 Design, Automation & Test in Eu-rope Conference & Exhibition (DATE), 2024, pp. 1–6. 

doi:10.23919/DATE58400.2024.10546623 .[253] W. Swaileh, F. Imbert, Y. Soullard, R. Tavenard, E. Anquetil, Online handwriting trajectory reconstruc-tion from kinematic sensors using temporal convolu-tional network, International Journal on Document Anal-ysis and Recognition (IJDAR) 26 (3) (2023) 289–302. 

doi:10.1007/s10032-023-00430-1 .[254] F. Imbert, Y. Soullard, E. Anquetil, T. Harbaum, A. Serdyuk, et al., Write on Paper and Get the Online Digital Trace: A New Era for Handwriting, in: IGS 2025 - 22nd Conference of the International Graphonomics Society, 2025. URL https: // hal.science /hal-05251666 [255] T. Harbaum, I. Topko, A. Serdyuk, I. Fürst-Walter, F. Kreß, et al., HW /SW Co-Design for Integrated AI Systems: Challenges, Use Cases and Steps Ahead, in: 3rd Workshop on Deep Learning for IoT (DL4IoT-2024), Munich, Germany, 2024. URL https: // hal.science /hal-04568785 [256] F. Kreß, A. Serdyuk, T. Hotfilter, J. Hoefer, T. Har-baum, et al., Hardware-aware workload distribution for ai-based online handwriting recognition in a sensor pen, in: 2022 11th Mediterranean Conference on Embedded Computing (MECO), 2022, pp. 1–4. doi:10.1109/ MECO55406.2022.9797131 .[257] F. Imbert, E. Anquetil, Y. Soullard, R. Tavenard, Mixture-of-experts for handwriting trajectory recon-struction from IMU sensors, Pattern Recognition 161 (2025) 111231. doi:10.1016/j.patcog.2024. 111231 .[258] F. Imbert, E. Anquetil, R. Tavenard, Y. Soullard, W. Swaileh, et al., Toward deep neural network for pen trajectory reconstruction from kinematic sensors, in: Symposium International Francophone sur l’Ecrit et le Document (SIFED’2022), Rennes, France, 2022, poster paper. [259] F. Imbert, R. Tavenard, Y. Soullard, E. Anquetil, Do-main adaptation for handwriting trajectory reconstruc-tion from IMU sensors, in: H. Mouchère, A. Zhu (Eds.), Document Analysis and Recognition – ICDAR 2024 Workshops, Vol. 14935 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, Cham, 2024, pp. 3–11. doi:10. 1007/978-3-031-70645-5_1 .[260] F. Imbert, Conception d’une architecture de réseaux de neurones profonds dédiée à la synthèse d’écriture manuscrite à partir de capteurs cinématiques d’un stylo numérique, Phd thesis, INSA Rennes, Rennes, France, thèse de doctorat en Informatique (2024). [261] A. Serdyuk, F. Kreß, I. Topko, T. Harbaum, J. Becker, et al., Improving online handwriting trajectory recon-struction based on temporal convolutional networks, in: 2024 Sensor Data Fusion: Trends, Solutions, Applica-tions (SDF), 2024, pp. 1–8. doi:10.1109/SDF63218. 2024.10773805 .[262] N. P. Jouppi, C. Young, N. Patil, D. Patterson, G. Agrawal, et al., In-datacenter performance analysis of a tensor processing unit, in: Proceedings of the 44th an-nual international symposium on computer architecture, 2017, pp. 1–12. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1704.04760 .[263] NVIDIA Corporation, NVIDIA A100 Tensor Core GPU Architecture, Technical Whitepaper, accessed: March 30, 2026(2020). URL https: // images.nvidia.com /

aem-dam /en-zz /Solutions /data-center /

nvidia-ampere-architecture-whitepaper.pdf [264] J. Choquette, W. Gandhi, O. Giroux, N. Stam, R. Krashinsky, NVIDIA A100 tensor core GPU: Perfor-mance and innovation, IEEE Micro 41 (2) (2021) 29–35. 

doi:10.1109/MM.2021.3061394 .86 [265] Y.-H. Chen, J. Emer, V. Sze, Eyeriss: A spatial architec-ture for energy-e ffi cient dataflow for convolutional neu-ral networks, in: Proceedings of the 43rd International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), 2016, pp. 367–379. doi:10.1109/ISCA.2016.40 .[266] A. Parashar, M. Rhu, A. Mukkara, A. Puglielli, R. Venkatesan, et al., SCNN: An accelerator for compressed-sparse convolutional neural networks, ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News 45 (2) (2017) 27–40. doi:10.1145/3140659.3080254 .[267] S. Han, X. Liu, H. Mao, J. Pu, A. Pedram, et al., EIE: E ffi cient inference engine on compressed deep neu-ral network, ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News 44 (3) (2016) 243–254. doi:10.1145/3007787. 3001163 .[268] P. P. Ray, A review on tinyml: State-of-the-art and prospects, Journal of King Saud University - Computer and Information Sciences 34 (4) (2022) 1595–1623. 

doi:10.1016/j.jksuci.2021.11.019 .[269] J. Gou, B. Yu, S. J. Maybank, D. Tao, Knowledge distillation: A survey, International Journal of Com-puter Vision 129 (6) (2021) 1789–1819. doi:10.1007/ s11263-021-01453-z .[270] P. A. Merolla, et al., A million spiking-neuron inte-grated circuit with a scalable communication network and interface, Science 345 (6197) (2014) 668–673. doi: 10.1126/science.1254642 .[271] M. Davies, N. Srinivasa, T.-H. Lin, et al., Loihi: A neu-romorphic manycore processor with on-chip learning, IEEE Micro 38 (1) (2018) 82–99. doi:10.1109/MM. 2018.112130359 .[272] G. Orchard, E. P. Frady, D. B. Rubin, et al., E ffi cient neuromorphic signal processing with Loihi 2, in: IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS), 2021, pp. 254–259. doi:10.1109/SiPS52927.2021.00047 .[273] S. B. Furber, D. R. Lester, L. A. Plana, et al., Overview of the SpiNNaker system architecture, IEEE Transac-tions on Computers 62 (12) (2012) 2454–2467. doi: 10.1109/TC.2012.142 .[274] C. Pehle, S. Billaudelle, B. Cramer, et al., The BrainScaleS-2 accelerated neuromorphic system with hybrid plasticity, Frontiers in Neuroscience 16 (2022) 795876. doi:10.3389/fnins.2022.795876 .[275] G. Gallego, T. Delbrück, G. Orchard, et al., Event-based vision: A survey, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 44 (1) (2020) 154–180. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2020.3008413 .[276] H. Moon, S. Lee, J. Jeong, S. Kim, YOLOv6 +: Simple and optimized object detection model for INT8 quan-tized inference on mobile devices, Signal, Image and Video Processing 19 (8) (2025) 665. doi:10.1007/ s11760-025-03564-8 .[277] H. Chen, Y. Wang, C. Xu, B. Shi, C. Xu, et al., Adder-Net: Do we really need multiplications in deep learning?, in: Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020, pp. 1468–1477. doi:10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00154 .[278] H. You, X. Chen, Y. Zhang, C. Li, S. Li, et al., Shif-tAddNet: A hardware-inspired deep network, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33 (2020) 2771–2783. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2010.12785 .[279] M. Rastegari, V. Ordonez, J. Redmon, A. Farhadi, XNOR-Net: Imagenet classification using binary convo-lutional neural networks, in: European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2016, pp. 525–542. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-46493-0_32 .[280] R. T. Q. Chen, Y. Rubanova, J. Bettencourt, D. Duve-naud, Neural ordinary di ff erential equations, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31 (2018). 

doi:10.48550/arXiv.1806.07366 .[281] K. Wang, Z. Liu, Y. Lin, J. Lin, S. Han, HAQ: Hardware-aware automated quantization with mixed precision, in: Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019, pp. 8612–8620. doi:10.1109/CVPR.2019.00882 .[282] H. Cai, L. Zhu, S. Han, ProxylessNAS: Direct neu-ral architecture search on target task and hardware, in: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1812.00332 .[283] B. Wu, X. Dai, P. Zhang, Y. Wang, F. Sun, et al., FB-Net: Hardware-aware e ffi cient convnet design via dif-ferentiable neural architecture search, in: Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019, pp. 10734–10742. 

doi:10.1109/CVPR.2019.01099 .[284] H. Cai, et al., Once-for-all: Train one network and specialize it for e ffi cient deployment, in: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020. 

doi:10.48550/arXiv.1908.09791 .[285] P. Louis, H. J. Flint, Formation of propionate and bu-tyrate by the human colonic microbiota, Environ. Mi-crobiol. 19 (2017) 29–48. doi:10.1111/1462-2920. 13589 .[286] H. Fu, L. Yu, H. Gao, C. Zhou, D. Zhang, et al., Genetic manipulation of butyrate formation pathways in clostrid-ium butyricum, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 39 (2011) 721–729. doi:10.1007/s10295-011-1064-1 .[287] J. M. Weinberger, et al., Clostridium butyricum maxi-mizes growth while minimizing enzyme usage and atp production: Metabolic flux distribution of a strain cul-tured in glycerol, Metab. Eng. (2013). 87 [288] A. Behravan, A. Hashemi, S.-A. Marashi, H. Fouladiha, Genome-scale metabolic model-based engineering of escherichia coli enhances recombinant single-chain antibody fragment production, Biotechnology let-ters 44 (10) (2022) 1231–1242. doi:10.1007/ s10529-022-03301-7 .[289] C. Bro, B. Regenberg, J. Förster, J. Nielsen, In sil-ico aided metabolic engineering of saccharomyces cere-visiae for improved bioethanol production, Metabolic engineering 8 (2) (2006) 102–111. doi:10.1016/j. ymben.2005.09.007 .[290] G. Chhetri, P. Kalita, T. Tripathi, An e ffi cient protocol to enhance recombinant protein expression using ethanol in escherichia coli, MethodsX 2 (2015) 385–391. doi: 10.1016/j.mex.2015.09.005 .[291] A. Topalo˘ glu, Ö. Esen, B. Turanlı-Yıldız, M. Arslan, Z. P. Çakar, From saccharomyces cerevisiae to ethanol: unlocking the power of evolutionary engineering in metabolic engineering applications, Journal of Fungi 9 (10) (2023) 984. doi:10.3390/jof9100984 .[292] J. D. Orth, I. Thiele, B. Ø. Palsson, What is flux balance analysis?, Nature Biotechnology 28 (3) (2010) 245–248. 

doi:10.1038/nbt.1614 .[293] A. Bordbar, J. M. Monk, Z. A. King, B. O. Palsson, Constraint-based models predict metabolic and associ-ated cellular functions, Nature Reviews Genetics 15 (2) (2014) 107–120. [294] J. Nielsen, Systems biology of metabolism, Annual re-view of biochemistry 86 (2017) 245–275. [295] P. Carbonell, A. J. Jervis, C. J. Robinson, C. Yan, M. Dunstan, et al., An automated design-build-test-learn pipeline for enhanced microbial production of fine chem-icals, Communications biology 1 (1) (2018) 66. [296] R. P. Niedz, T. J. Evens, Design of experiments (doe)—history, concepts, and relevance to in vitro cul-ture, In Vitro Cellular & Developmental Biology-Plant 52 (6) (2016) 547–562. [297] C.-F. Mandenius, A. Brundin, Bioprocess optimization using design-of-experiments methodology, Biotechnol-ogy Progress 24 (6) (2008) 1191–1203. doi:10.1021/ bp070336w .[298] J. S. Edwards, B. O. Palsson, Systems properties of the haemophilus influenzae rd metabolic genotype, Journal of Biological Chemistry 274 (25) (1999) 17410–17416. 

doi:10.1074/jbc.274.25.17410 .[299] E. J. O’Brien, J. M. Monk, B. O. Palsson, Using genome-scale models to predict biological capabilities, Cell 161 (5) (2015) 971–987. doi:10.1016/j.cell. 2015.05.019 .[300] I. Thiele, B. Ø. Palsson, A protocol for generating a high-quality genome-scale metabolic reconstruction, Nature Protocols 5 (1) (2010) 93–121. doi:10.1038/nprot. 2009.203 .[301] D. Machado, S. Andrejev, M. Tramontano, K. R. Patil, Fast automated reconstruction of genome-scale metabolic models for microbial species and communi-ties, Nucleic Acids Research 46 (15) (2018) 7542–7553. 

doi:10.1093/nar/gky537 .[302] A. Heinken, S. Magnúsdóttir, R. M. T. Fleming, I. Thiele, Demeter: Effi cient simultaneous curation of genome-scale reconstructions guided by experi-mental data and refined gene annotations, Bioinfor-matics 37 (21) (2021) 3974–3975. doi:10.1093/ bioinformatics/btab543 .[303] C. S. Henry, M. DeJongh, A. A. Best, P. M. Frybarger, B. Linsay, et al., High-throughput generation, optimiza-tion and analysis of genome-scale metabolic models, Na-ture biotechnology 28 (9) (2010) 977–982. [304] H. Wang, S. Marcišauskas, B. J. Sánchez, I. Domenzain, D. Hermansson, et al., Raven 2.0: A versatile toolbox for metabolic network reconstruction and a case study on streptomyces coelicolor, PLoS computational biology 14 (10) (2018) e1006541. [305] M. Aite, M. Chevallier, C. Frioux, C. Trottier, J. Got, et al., Traceability, reproducibility and wiki-exploration for “à-la-carte” reconstructions of genome-scale metabolic models, PLoS computational biology 14 (5) (2018) e1006146. [306] M. Kanehisa, S. Goto, Kegg: kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes, Nucleic acids research 28 (1) (2000) 27–30. [307] R. Caspi, R. Billington, C. A. Fulcher, I. M. Keseler, A. Kothari, et al., The metacyc database of metabolic pathways and enzymes, Nucleic acids research 46 (D1) (2018) D633–D639. [308] E. J. Bautista, J. Zinski, S. M. Szczepanek, E. L. John-son, E. R. Tulman, et al., Semi-automated curation of metabolic models via flux balance analysis: A case study with mycoplasma gallisepticum, PLoS Computa-tional Biology 9 (9) (2013) e1003208. doi:10.1371/ journal.pcbi.1003208 .[309] I. M. de Mas, H. Herand, J. Carrasco, L. K. Nielsen, P. I. Johansson, A protocol for the automatic construc-tion of highly curated genome-scale models of human metabolism, Bioengineering 10 (5) (2023) 576. doi: 10.3390/bioengineering10050576 .[310] G. L. Medlock, J. A. Papin, Guiding the refine-ment of biochemical knowledgebases with ensembles of metabolic networks and machine learning, Cell Systems 88 10 (1) (2020) 109–119. doi:10.1016/j.cels.2019. 12.011 .[311] N. Nursimulu, A. M. Moses, J. Parkinson, Architect: A tool for aiding the reconstruction of high-quality metabolic models through improved enzyme annotation, PLOS Computational Biology 18 (9) (2022) e1010452. 

doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010452 .[312] W. Han, L. Xiao, H. Sun, G. Xiang, Q. Jia, et al., Al-phagem enables precise genome-scale metabolic mod-elling by integrating protein structure alignment with deep-learning-based dark metabolism mining, bioRxiv (2025). doi:10.1101/2025.07.02.662345 .URL https: // doi.org /10.1101 /2025.07.02.662345 [313] V. Satish Kumar, M. S. Dasika, C. D. Maranas, Opti-mization based automated curation of metabolic recon-structions, BMC bioinformatics 8 (1) (2007) 212. [314] R. Rak, R. T. Batista-Navarro, A. Rowley, J. Carter, S. Ananiadou, Text-mining-assisted biocuration work-flows in argo, Database 2014 (2014) bau070. doi: 10.1093/database/bau070 .[315] X. Li, A. Whan, M. McNeil, S. C. Andrew, X. Dai, et al., Genewhisperer: Enhancing manual genome annotation with large language models, bioRxiv (2025). doi:10. 1101/2025.03.14.642847 .[316] Q. Jin, Y. Yang, Q. Chen, Z. Lu, Genegpt: Augmenting large language models with domain tools for improved access to biomedical information, arXiv preprint (2023). 

arXiv:2305.12042 .URL https: // arxiv.org /abs /2305.12042 [317] S. Toro, A. V. Anagnostopoulos, S. M. Bello, K. Blum-berg, R. Cameron, et al., Dynamic retrieval augmented generation of ontologies using artificial intelligence (dragon-ai), Journal of Biomedical Semantics 15 (1) (2024) 19. doi:10.1186/s13326-024-00316-1 .[318] Z. Wang, Q. Jin, C.-H. Wei, S. Tian, P.-T. Lai, et al., Geneagent: Self-verification language agent for gene-set analysis using domain databases, Na-ture Methods 22 (2025) 1677–1685. doi:10.1038/ s41592-025-02418-3 .[319] S. Lobentanzer, S. Feng, N. Bruderer, A. Maier, C. Wang, et al., A platform for the biomedical ap-plication of large language models, Nature Biotech-nology 43 (2) (2025) 166–169. doi:10.1038/ s41587-024-02120-9 .[320] M. Andronov, V. Voinarovska, N. Andronova, M. Wand, D.-A. Clevert, et al., Reagent prediction with a molec-ular transformer improves reaction data quality, Chemi-cal Science 14 (12) (2023) 3235–3246. doi:10.1039/ D2SC06448B .[321] X. Wang, C. Yao, Y. Zhang, J. Yu, H. Qiao, et al., From theory to experiment: Transformer-based gener-ation enables rapid discovery of novel reactions, Journal of Cheminformatics 14 (1) (2022) 60. doi:10.1186/ s13321-022-00629-4 .[322] J. P. Faria, M. Rocha, I. Rocha, C. S. Henry, Meth-ods for automated genome-scale metabolic model re-construction, Biochemical Society Transactions 46 (4) (2018) 931–936. doi:10.1042/BST20170246 .[323] S. Magnúsdóttir, A. Heinken, L. Kutt, D. A. Ravcheev, E. Bauer, et al., Generation of genome-scale metabolic reconstructions for 773 members of the human gut mi-crobiota, Nature biotechnology 35 (1) (2017) 81–89. [324] G. L. Medlock, T. J. Moutinho, J. A. Papin, Medusa: Software to build and analyze ensembles of genome-scale metabolic network reconstructions, PLoS Com-putational Biology 16 (4) (2020) e1007847. doi:10. 1371/journal.pcbi.1007847 .[325] A. Couturier, M. A. Akhloufi, A review on absolute visual localization for uav, Robotics and Autonomous Systems 135 (2021) 103666. doi:10.1016/j.robot. 2020.103666 .[326] M. Rad, M. Oberweger, V. Lepetit, Feature mapping for learning fast and accurate 3d pose inference from synthetic images, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2018, pp. 4663–4672. doi:10.1109/CVPR. 2018.00490 .[327] H. Mokayed, P. Shivakumara, R. Saini, M. Liwicki, L. C. Hin, et al., Anomaly detection in natural scene images based on enhanced fine-grained saliency and fuzzy logic, IEEE Access 9 (2021) 129102–129109. doi:10.1109/ ACCESS.2021.3113301 .[328] H. Mokayed, L. K. Meng, H. H. Woon, N. H. Sin, Car plate detection engine based on conventional edge de-tection technique, in: International Conference on Com-puter Graphics, Multimedia and Image Processing (CG-MIP), 2014. [329] P.-E. Sarlin, M. Dusmanu, J. L. Schönberger, P. Speciale, L. Gruber, et al., Lamar: Benchmarking localization and mapping for augmented reality, in: European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), Springer, 2022, pp. 686– 704. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-19839-7_40 .[330] D. G. Lowe, Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 60 (2) (2004) 91–110. doi:10.1023/B:VISI.0000029664.99615. 94 .[331] H. S. Ng, Y. H. Tay, K. M. Liang, H. Mokayed, H. H. Woon, Detection and recognition of malaysian special license plate based on sift features (2015). arXiv:1504. 06921 .89 [332] H. Bay, T. Tuytelaars, L. Van Gool, Surf: Speeded up robust features, in: Computer Vision – ECCV 2006, Vol. 3951 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 2006, pp. 404–417. doi:10.1007/11744023_32 .[333] E. Rublee, V. Rabaud, K. Konolige, G. Bradski, Orb: An e ffi cient alternative to sift or surf, in: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2011, pp. 2564–2571. doi:10.1109/ICCV. 2011.6126544 .[334] P.-E. Sarlin, D. DeTone, T. Malisiewicz, A. Rabinovich, Superglue: Learning feature matching with graph neural networks, in: Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020, pp. 4938–4947. arXiv:1911.11763 , doi:10. 1109/CVPR42600.2020.00499 .[335] P. Lindenberger, P.-E. Sarlin, M. Pollefeys, Lightglue: Local feature matching at light speed, in: Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023, pp. 17627–17638. arXiv:2306. 13643 , doi:10.1109/ICCV51070.2023.01619 .[336] V. Balntas, K. Lenc, A. Vedaldi, K. Mikolajczyk, Hpatches: A benchmark and evaluation of handcrafted and learned local descriptors, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2017, pp. 5173–5182. doi:10. 1109/CVPR.2017.547 .[337] Z. Li, N. Snavely, Megadepth: Learning single-view depth prediction from internet photos, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition (CVPR), 2018, pp. 2041–2050. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2018.00218 .[338] A. Dai, A. X. Chang, M. Savva, M. Halber, T. Funkhouser, et al., Scannet: Richly-annotated 3d reconstructions of indoor scenes, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2017, pp. 5828–5839. doi:10. 1109/CVPR.2017.261 .[339] T. Nakamura, M. Mishra, S. Tedeschi, Y. Chai, J. Stiller-man, et al., Aurora-m: Open source continual pre-training for multilingual language and code, in: Proceed-ings of the 31st International Conference on Computa-tional Linguistics: Industry Track, Association for Com-putational Linguistics, Abu Dhabi, UAE, 2025, pp. 656– 678. URL https: // aclanthology.org /2025.coling-industry.56 /

[340] Z. Chen, S. Wang, T. Xiao, Y. Wang, S. Chen, et al., Sub-scaling laws: On the role of data density and train-ing strategies in llms, arXiv preprint (2025). doi:10. 48550/arXiv.2507.10613 .[341] M. J. Page, J. E. McKenzie, P. M. Bossuyt, I. Boutron, T. C. Ho ff mann, et al., The prisma 2020 statement: An updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews, BMJ 372 (2021) n71. doi:10.1136/bmj.n71 .[342] T. Adewumi, L. Alkhaled, N. Gurung, G. van Boven, I. Pagliai, Fairness and bias in multimodal ai: A survey, arXiv preprint (2024). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2406. 19097 .[343] A. Verma, Z. Wu, Z. Zhou, X. Lin, Z. Chen, et al., Un-covering scaling laws for large language models via in-verse problems, arXiv preprint (2025). doi:10.48550/ arXiv.2509.07909 .[344] Y. Goel, A. Sengupta, T. Chakraborty, Position: Enough of scaling llms! let’s focus on downscaling, arXiv preprint (2025). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2505.00985 .[345] X. Bi, D. Chen, G. Chen, S. Chen, D. Dai, et al., Deepseek llm: Scaling open-source language models with long-termism, arXiv preprint (2024). doi:10. 48550/arXiv.2401.02954 .[346] Y. Wu, Z. Sun, S. Li, S. Welleck, Y. Yang, Inference scal-ing laws: An empirical analysis of compute-optimal in-ference for llm problem-solving, in: International Con-ference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2025. URL https: // openreview.net /

[347] C. Xiao, J. Cai, W. Zhao, G. Zeng, B. Lin, Densing law of llms, arXiv preprint (2024). doi:10.48550/arXiv. 2412.04315 .[348] M. A. Hossain, X. Wu, V. Taylor, A. Jannesari, Gener-alizing scaling laws for dense and sparse large language models, arXiv preprint (2025). arXiv:2508.06617 .URL https: // arxiv.org /abs /2508.06617 [349] C. Tao, Q. Liu, L. Dou, N. Muennigho ff , Z. Wan, et al., Scaling laws with vocabulary: Larger models deserve larger vocabularies, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 37, 2024, pp. 114147–114179. URL https: // proceedings.neurips. cc /paper_files /paper /2024 /file /

cf5a019ae9c11b4be88213ce3f85d85c-Paper-Conference. pdf [350] H. Ge, J. Feng, Q. Huang, F. Fu, X. Nie, et al., Bytescale: Communication-e ffi cient scaling of llm training with a 2048k context length on 16384 gpus, in: Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2025 Conference, 2025, pp. 963– 978. doi:10.1145/3679424.3686990 .[351] Y. Ruan, C. Maddison, T. Hashimoto, Observational scaling laws and the predictability of language model performance, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 37, 2024, pp. 15841–15892. URL https: // proceedings.neurips. cc /paper_files /paper /2024 /file /

1cded4f97cf5f01a284c574110b7e3b9-Paper-Conference. pdf 90 [352] H. Lin, B. Huang, H. Ye, Q. Chen, Z. Wang, et al., Se-lecting large language models to fine-tune via rectified scaling law, in: Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2024. URL https: // proceedings.mlr.press /

[353] N. Roberts, N. Chatterji, S. Narang, M. Lewis, D. Hup-kes, Compute-optimal scaling of skills: Knowledge vs reasoning, arXiv preprint (2025). arXiv:2503.10061 .URL https: // arxiv.org /abs /2503.10061 [354] D. Wyatte, F. Tahmasbi, M. Li, T. Markovich, Scaling laws for discriminative classification in large language models, Applied AI Letters 6 (1) (2025) e109. doi:10. 1002/ail2.109 .[355] B. Zhang, Z. Liu, C. Cherry, O. Firat, When scaling meets llm finetuning: The e ff ect of data, model and fine-tuning method, in: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024. URL https: // openreview.net /forum?id =3dK2R2oGkB [356] Y. Chen, B. Huang, Y. Gao, Z. Wang, J. Yang, et al., Scal-ing laws for predicting downstream performance in llms, Transactions on Machine Learning Research (2025). URL https: // openreview.net /group?id =TMLR [357] Z. Liu, C. Zhao, H. Huang, S. Chen, J. Zhang, et al., Paretoq: Scaling laws in extremely low-bit llm quantiza-tion, arXiv preprint (2025). arXiv:2502.02631 .URL https: // arxiv.org /abs /2502.02631 [358] R. Liu, J. Gao, J. Zhao, K. Zhang, X. Li, et al., Can 1b llm surpass 405b llm? rethinking compute-optimal test-time scaling, arXiv preprint (2025). arXiv:2502. 06703 .URL https: // arxiv.org /abs /2502.06703 [359] N. Singhi, H. Bansal, A. Hosseini, A. Grover, K.-W. Chang, et al., When to solve, when to verify: Compute-optimal problem solving and generative verification for llm reasoning, arXiv preprint (2025). arXiv:2504. 01005 .URL https: // arxiv.org /abs /2504.01005 [360] C. V. Snell, J. Lee, K. Xu, A. Kumar, Scaling llm test-time compute optimally can be more e ff ective than scal-ing parameters for reasoning, in: International Confer-ence on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2025. URL https: // openreview.net /

[361] Q. Pan, W. Ji, Y. Ding, J. Li, S. Chen, et al., A sur-vey of slow thinking-based reasoning llms using rein-forcement learning and test-time scaling law, Informa-tion Processing and Management 63 (2, Part A) (2026) 104394. doi:10.1016/j.ipm.2025.104394 .URL https: // www.sciencedirect.com /science /article /pii /

S0306457325003358 [362] J. Kaplan, S. McCandlish, T. Henighan, T. B. Brown, B. Chess, et al., Scaling laws for neural language models, arXiv preprint (2020). arXiv:2001.08361 .URL https: // arxiv.org /abs /2001.08361 [363] Z. Ji, M. Jiang, A systematic review of electricity de-mand for large language models: Evaluations, chal-lenges, and solutions, Renewable and Sustainable En-ergy Reviews 225 (2026) 116159. doi:10.1016/j. rser.2025.116159 .91