Title: Holistic Energy Performance Management: Enablers, Capabilities, and Features

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.18841v1

Published Time: Fri, 20 Mar 2026 01:06:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
# Holistic Energy Performance Management: Enablers, Capabilities, and Features 

Meysam Masoudi ∗, Milad Ganjalizadeh ∗, Tahar Zanouda †, P˚ al Frenger ∗∗Ericsson AB, Sweden. 

{meysam.masoudi, milad.ganjalizadeh, pal.frenger }@ericsson.com 

> †

tzanouda@acm.org 

Abstract —Energy consumption is a significant concern for mobile network operators, and to enable further network energy improvements it is also an important target when developing the emerging 6G standard. In this paper we show that, despite the existence of many energy-saving features in 5G new radio (NR) networks, activating them in isolation yields only suboptimal savings and often compromises other network key performance indicators (KPIs) such as coverage or latency. We first introduce a compact taxonomy that distinguishes hardware capabilities from higher-layer features. Features fall into two classes: (i) signaling and scheduling mechanisms that create idle windows, and (ii) features that utilize those windows to save energy. We then present a feature orchestrator as a logical node to coordinate between features to maximize the gain. Using a3GPP-aligned simulator with product-realistic parameters, we show that coordinating lean NR, scheduling, and advanced sleep modes significantly reduces gNodeB (gNB) energy consumption with negligible throughput loss, compared to the uncoordinated scenario. We conclude by outlining open issues in observability, system dynamics, coordination, and intelligent automation for energy performance management. 

Index Terms —Energy Management, Artificial Intelligence for 5G-and-beyond networks. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

The Information and Communication Technology (ICT) sector consumed about 4% of the world’s electricity in its operational phase and contributed roughly 1.4% of global greenhouse gas emissions [1], [2]. Although 5G is more energy-efficient per bit than 4G, its wider bandwidth, its use of many more antenna branches, and overall, its more capable hardware, have increased absolute energy use [3]. Therefore, it is crucial to reduce networks’ energy consumption and hence emissions and operating costs [4]. Mobile networks are dimensioned for the peak hours, leav-ing substantial capacity underutilized for most of the day. In commercial European 4G deployments, the average cell occupies about 20% of physical resource blocks (PRBs) [5]; in early 5G NR this drops below 6% . This under-utilization presents an opportunity for savings with limited risk to user experience. However, radio power consumption does not scale proportionally relative to load. The study in [6] reports that traffic increases the energy consumption by up to 7.4% . Recent field measurements for operational customer network indicate that this is slightly higher today, at around 10% . Rising traffic erodes peak-hour user equipment (UE) throughput, restoring quality of service (QoS) typically requires more spectrum, sites, or transmit power, which increases energy consumption. In lab measurements, a single radio unit (RU) may exhibit a significant load dependency, with full-load power usage being roughly double the zero-load value. In live networks, concur-rent saturation across sectors is rare, which is why aggregated load dependency rarely exceeds 10% . Consequently, energy-saving efforts should target the typical (low-to-moderate) load regime by creating longer idle intervals and reducing idle power. The long-term vision is near-zero power at zero load, with energy scaling proportionally with traffic. Energy-saving measures, however, entail trade-offs. Fea-tures that reduce energy (e.g., putting some gNBs to sleep) can degrade KPIs such as coverage, latency, or throughput or raise conflicts [7], if not coordinated. Therefore, activating a single feature in isolation often yields suboptimal energy savings. The studies in [8], [9] provide a comprehensive literature review on individual radio access network (RAN) energy-saving mechanisms (e.g, lean signaling and carrier shutdown), and review Machine learning (ML) algorithms for prediction and policy learning. Industry roadmaps in [10], [11] outline practical pathways towards less energy-consuming networks, including multi-carrier and multi-band power amplifier (PA) design, and architecture design. The study in [12] reviews the architectural and spectrum/resource sharing strategies to further widen the idle windows and enable deeper sleep across layers. Energy measures are interdependent across the RAN, core, and data-center domains. Therefore, to amplify the gain, energy-saving features must be orchestrated. Re-cent initiatives advocate policy-driven, cloud-native control planes that coordinate cross-layer energy performance. Refer-ence [13] explores energy-aware orchestration in cell-free mas-sive multiple-input and multiple-output (MIMO), highlighting the need for feature coordination in virtualized RANs. Unlike prior studies that examine individual energy-saving mechanisms in isolation, this paper leverages coordina-tion to unlock the full energy-saving potential of 5G-and-beyond networks. Specifically, we (i) introduce a capabil-ity–feature taxonomy that distinguishes hardware enablers, idle-window–creating features, and idle-window–utilizing fea-tures and their timescales and constraints; (ii) propose a policy-driven feature orchestrator that governs when and how existing features may act, resolves conflicts across layers, and aligns timescales under KPI constraints; and (iii) provide a case study, using a 3GPP-aligned simulator, showing that advanced sleep modes achieve better gains when jointly configured and coordinated. 1

> arXiv:2603.18841v1 [cs.NI] 19 Mar 2026

II. FROM CAPABILITIES TO FEATURES 

In this section, we distinguish between hardware energy-saving capabilities (i.e., what equipment can do) and energy-saving features (i.e., the algorithms/policies that decide when and how to utilize those capabilities). Capabilities include advanced radio sleep states, processing power control, pas-sive/smart cooling, and multi-band PAs. Features fall into two families: (i) signaling/scheduling/lean-NR mechanisms that create idle windows, and (ii) radio frequency (RF)-layer actions (advanced sleep modes (ASMs), carrier shutdown, massive-MIMO sleep, dynamic power pooling) that utilize those windows for larger savings. Timescales (Table I) range from symbol-level μs, to ms-level scheduling, to tens of ms for deeper sleep, and seconds for orchestration; the main KPI risks are coverage, latency, and handover robustness. Table I summarizes this taxonomy and is reused as a reference. 

A. Hardware Energy–Saving Capabilities 

This subsection explains the principal hardware levers, along with their inherent trade-offs, latency vs energy-saving. 

1) Radio Sleep Capabilities: Modern 5G radios offer three built-in sleep levels: micro, light, and deep. Each deeper level saves more power but takes longer to wake-up from. Higher-level algorithms choose which level to enter based on the length of the idle intervals.  

> •

Micro sleep : disables fast-recovery blocks, i.e., PAs, low-noise amplifiers, for tens of microseconds, e.g., approxi-mately 71 μs, between scheduled symbols.  

> •

Light sleep : deactivates additional RF/baseband compo-nents for 1–5 ms during brief idle gaps, saving energy at the cost of millisecond wake-up delay.  

> •

Deep sleep : delivers the highest savings. It deactivates most of the RF and baseband components, retaining only timing keep-alives; wake-up takes 10 –50 ms or more. 

2) Multi-band PA Capability: PAs are among the most energy-hungry blocks in a RU front end (FE). A multi-band PA employs reconfigurable RF networks to operate across multiple bands used by 4G and 5G, consolidating functionality into fewer chains. This capability enables power pooling, where it dynamically reallocates power between bands. Transitions occur on millisecond timescales and must be coordinated with the scheduler and traffic steering to meet per-band linearity, filtering, and emission constraints. 

3) Processing Power Management: Baseband and edge-cloud processors pair dynamic voltage and frequency scal-ing (DVFS) with dynamic resource sleeping (DRS). DVFS lowers clock and core voltage under light load, while DRS places unused cores or accelerators into progressively deeper power-saving modes. Combined policies add only micro to millisecond latency. Furthermore, function virtualization may consolidate workloads onto fewer active servers, allowing the remainder servers to enter deep sleep and save energy. 

4) Passive and Smart Cooling: Active thermal management infrastructure represents approximately 30% of a site’s energy consumption [11]. Two-phase evaporative passive cooling sys-tems, and optimized airflow channels enable passive removal of heat without compressors or fans, driving cooling power toward zero. When active cooling system remains, AI-based controllers throttle pumps and fans in proportion to load and ambient temperature, which may lead to energy savings. 

B. Creating Idle Time-Frequency Windows 

This subsection reviews the methods that shape traffic and signaling, in time and frequency, to enable longer and wider contiguous idle intervals. We cover three feature families: (i) lean NR operation that reduces always-on transmissions; (ii) control-/data-plane scheduling (paging alignment, batching, traffic gating) that time-shifts non-urgent traffic; and (iii) traffic steering/load placement that moves UEs to more efficient layers or cells, increasing idle time elsewhere. In isolation, without supporting capabilities in the underlying hardware, these features can yield modest savings. However, they enable opportunities for deeper sleep states to be used. 

1) Lean NR Design: The 5G NR standard enhances energy efficiency in radio networks by incorporating support for sleep states in network equipment. It achieves this through signifi-cantly longer periods between mandatory transmissions (e.g., up to 160 ms for physical random access channel (PRACH) period, compared to 4G’s 20 ms). Additionally, 5G NR reduces the need for constant signaling transmissions in the frequency domain, reflecting its ultra-lean physical layer design. This design enables deeper and more extended sleep periods during periods of low or no traffic, resulting in lower energy consump-tion compared to 4G cells for the same traffic volume. 

2) Control- and Data-Plane Scheduling: A mobile network operates over two logical planes. The control plane exchanges signaling (e.g., paging, radio resource control (RRC) mes-sages, mobility commands) between UEs, gNBs, and the core; the data plane carries UE payloads. Under low traffic, control signaling can dominate energy consumption, especially when frequent paging bursts keep nodes awake. As the number of UEs grows, the cumulative signaling may prevent radios and processors from entering sleep states. Energy-aware schedul-ing mitigates this effect by batching control messages, align-ing, and extending control signaling periods. While the control plane shapes the signaling time, the data plane determines how UE traffic is mapped to the time and frequency resources of the air interface. Energy-aware schedulers accumulate best-effort packets into short, high-throughput bursts, then leave the carrier idle long enough to trigger micro-, light-, or even deep-sleep in the radio. On the uplink, configured-grant and buffer-status-report timers are staggered so UEs request resources in aligned slots, further extending contiguous idle periods. Delay-tolerant flows (e.g., video streaming service) can be gated for tens of milliseconds, whereas latency-critical bearers bypass gating to meet 5G QoS budgets. By matching burst duration and gate timers to each QoS class, the scheduler both preserves user experience and creates the long, predictable idle windows needed for deeper sleep states (see Section II-C). 

3) Traffic Steering: Traffic steering dynamically redis-tributes UE traffic among neighboring cells, carriers, and radio access technologies (RATs). By shifting flows to cells operat-ing on wider, energy-efficient 5G carriers (often 100MHz in mid band) or to less loaded layers, operators can both increase 2cell idle time and lower joules per bit, in some deployments by up to an order of magnitude. The method also exploits the fact that more than 80% of downlink (DL) traffic originates indoors: relocating indoor UE from outdoor macro layers to indoor small cells satisfies throughput and latency targets at a fraction of the transmit power. Besides frequency layer migration, modern steering frameworks account for multi-cell sets, diverse QoS classes, and evolving interference patterns. When coupled with carrier aggregation, steering can balance load while keeping additional carriers in deep sleep, further ex-tending energy gains. Steering decisions must be orchestrated with other energy-saving functions (e.g., ASMs) to avoid KPI degradations. 

4) Architecture Split: In 5G, gNBs can be divided into a Central Unit (CU) and a Distributed Unit (DU). Centralized processing provides extensive benefits such as joint processing of radio signals, load balancing, and energy saving. The split architecture distributes the processing tasks between these two units. CU handles higher-layer protocols, such as non-real-time processing, including the packet data convergence protocol (PDCP) and RRC. DU manages real-time lower-layer functions, such as the radio link control, medium access control, and parts of the physical (PHY) layer. By splitting the gNodeB into CU and DU, the network can achieve the following energy-saving benefits: 1) Flexible Resource Allocation: Splitting allows for a flex-ible allocation of processing resources, reducing the need for over-provisioning and thus saving energy. 2) Load Balancing: Traffic can be dynamically balanced between CUs and DUs, ensuring efficient resource use and reducing unnecessary power consumption. 

5) Dynamic spectrum sharing (DSS): To achieve cost-effective 5G coverage, operators also need to use low bands that are currently occupied by 4G. Full spectrum reallocation is often impractical. DSS allows 5G to utilize existing 4G carriers without disrupting live services. DSS lets 5G and 4G share the same carrier. Rather than statically reallocating spectrum, the scheduler assigns PRBs to 5G or 4G every transmission time interval to track the UEs and traffic mix. Coexistence relies on 5G rate-matching around 4G reference and control signals, and careful placement of 5G synchronization so it does not collide with 4G broadcast/multicast subframes, resulting in per-transmission time interval DL/uplink PRB partitioning without re-planning carriers. From the energy perspective, DSS can reduce network power by avoiding new sites/carriers and consolidating traffic on existing bands. However, 4G’s always-on signals fragment idle periods, and thus, may limit activation of deeper SMs. 

C. Utilizing Idle Time-Frequency Windows 

This subsection explains features that utilize the idle in-tervals created in Sec. II-B. The design goal is to maximize energy savings per unit idle time through coordination with other features, e.g., scheduling. 

1) Advanced Sleep Modes: Modern 5G radios expose three graded sleep states in 3GPP known as ASMs [14]. As capa-bilities (Sec. II-A1), they define what hardware can switch off and the corresponding wake-up latencies. As a feature, the controller decides when/how to enter/exit each level based on traffic and coordination signals. ASMs rely on the scheduler to both create and protect the contiguous idle intervals needed for deeper sleep, and to restore service after wake-up. Moreover, predictive wake-ups may reduce KPI degradation risk. 

2) Carrier Shutdown: Carrier shutdown (CS) deactivates capacity carriers (i.e., additional cells deployed on top of the always-on coverage layer) during periods of light traffic. Once the real-time load on a capacity carrier falls below a configurable threshold for a certain time, the carrier first enters 

cell-sleep , scheduling is halted and the PA bias is lowered while reference signals remain, enabling sub-10 ms wake-up. If low load persists, the radio transitions to deep-sleep , pow-ering down most PAs, RF chains, and parts of the baseband, cutting per-carrier power by up to 90% . Three parameters dominate the CS design: (i) the load threshold, (ii) minimum on/off duration, and (iii) predictive wake-up triggers based on traffic forecasts and coverage overlap. Machine learning pre-dictors can reduce false sleeps, premature shutdowns followed by rapid re-activation. However, coordination is essential with traffic steering (Section II-B3). Without such harmonization, aggressive shutdowns risk handover bursts, throughput loss, and hardware wear from excessive power-cycling. 

3) Massive MIMO Sleep: Massive MIMO radio uses a large number of antennas up to 64 transmit ports, each with its own PA, RF chain, and signal processing. Massive MIMO sleep disables surplus branches when spatial-multiplexing demand is low. A typical policy scales a 64 array down to 32 or 

16 once the cell load stays below a certain threshold for a certain time, resulting in reduced power consumption. With massive MIMO sleep activated, UEs may start to report less favorable channel state information (CSI), and the scheduler may reduce modulation or allocate more bandwidth. However, if the scheduler is aware of the massive MIMO sleep, it can properly allocate radio resources and form beams with the available antennas. While Massive MIMO Sleep can dramat-ically reduce radio power consumption, it comes with trade-offs. Deactivating antenna elements may lead to some KPI degradations, especially for cell-edge UEs. Machine learning predictions of traffic patterns can be used to optimize this process, allowing the system to proactively activate sleep mode without causing transient service impacts [15]. 

4) Dynamic Power Pooling: Conventional radios use a ded-icated, peak-dimensioned PA per carrier/band, leaving many amplifiers underutilized at light load. Dynamic power pooling replaces this with a shared PA budget across bands using the multi-band PA capability (Sec. II-A2). Because band traffic peaks seldom coincide, power can be shifted to the busy band on demand; if several bands peak simultaneously, the controller either activates additional PAs or accepts minor per-band KPI degradation to stay within the budget. Reports indicate that migrating from single-band to pooled multi-band radios (two–three bands per unit) can yield on the order of 20 –30% site-energy savings. Pooling operates on ms timescales and should be coordinated with scheduling/steering, ASM hysteresis, and carrier-shutdown sequencing to avoid on/off toggling and maximize contiguous sleep. 3Hardware and feature constraints limit achievable energy savings. Individual features expose only local capabilities and lack global network visibility and coordination. A feature or-chestrator aggregates this information to enable a coordinated, network-wide decision-making, as described in Section III. III. F EATURE ORCHESTRATION 

Mobile networks are designed to provide seamless service and meet stringent KPI requirements (e.g., coverage, latency, throughput), while minimizing operational costs, including en-ergy consumption. Energy-saving features often optimize local objectives and, when activated independently, can conflict or overlook cross-layer synergies, leading to inefficiencies or KPI degradation. A policy-driven feature orchestration layer is therefore required to coordinate features and translate target KPIs into coherent end-to-end behavior. The feature orches-trator is a logical coordination node that, within the 3GPP architecture, can be implemented in the management and orchestration layer and, within the O-RAN architecture, maps to the service management and orchestration framework. The feature orchestrator ingests (i) operator policies (e.g., energy minimization subject to KPI constraints), (ii) network state, and (iii) the set of available features and hardware capabilities. Based on these inputs, it determines which features may act and when, while leaving the actual actuation to the respective feature functions. The orchestrator can be realized using rule-based policies and predictors, or via ML-based optimization, which may improve confidence margins. The orchestrator operates across three functional phases: preparation, execution, and monitoring. 

1) Preparation Phase: The orchestrator aggregates infor-mation including operator policies, required KPI thresholds, available features and capabilities, and the current network context. It runs a load estimator and short-horizon traffic predictor to estimate expected idle windows, traffic burstiness, and potential load shifts due to mobility. Each feature exposes metadata to the orchestrator, such as its operational timescale, wake-up latency, required inputs, energy-saving potential, and known dependencies or conflicts with other features. Using this information, the orchestrator determines a subset of fea-tures that can be safely coordinated under the prevailing condi-tions. Conflicting combinations (e.g., carrier shutdown without prior traffic steering) are avoided by design. This selection can be implemented using a feature dependency and conflict graph. The orchestrator also aligns feature timescales by configuring thresholds, dwell timers, and hysteresis parameters, ensuring features are aligned. At the end of this phase, the orchestrator produces a coordinated configuration plan for the selected features. 

2) Execution Phase: The orchestrator issues configuration and activation signals to the selected features through appro-priate management and control interfaces. These signals may include enabling or disabling features, setting thresholds or dwell times, and defining priorities or rank constraints among features. The orchestrator does not directly trigger physical actions such as sleep transitions. Instead, it constrains and guides the behavior of lower-layer controllers, allowing them 

Fig. 1: System-level view of the feature orchestrator’s phases for coordinated energy-saving operation. to operate autonomously within policy-compliant and KPI-safe boundaries. This separation limits the impact of prediction errors and reduces the risk of cascading failures caused by incorrect decisions. 

3) Monitoring Phase: The orchestrator continuously ob-serves energy-related metrics and KPI indicators from both the serving cell and neighboring cells. Guardrails are enforced proactively to prevent violations of constraints. Since reacting after a KPI violation has occurred is often too late, the or-chestrator relies on predicted load and conservative confidence margins to act in advance. If the monitored indicators suggest elevated risk, such as rising neighbor load, the orchestrator may relax energy-saving configurations, temporarily deactivate certain features, or roll back to a safer operating point. Fig. 1 illustrates the overall system view of the policy-driven feature orchestrator, including its preparation, execution, and monitoring phases. Table I serves as the deployment map. It links each feature to the hardware capabilities it uses, indicates prerequisite coordination with peer features (e.g., steering before shutdown), and annotates the dominant timescale and protocol layer. Practically, it is a checklist for the orchestrator: which enablers must be present, which interfaces must be exposed, and on what timescale the policy should act to achieve KPI-safe cost reduction with a focus on energy. IV. U SE CASE : C OORDINATED SCHEDULING AND ASM S

We evaluate the energy–throughput trade-off of coordinated idle-time creation using traffic gating, NR lean signaling, and ASMs on top of the radio sleep capability in Section II-A. We use an event-driven, symbol-level 6G/NR simulator aligned with 3GPP assumptions; key parameters and the normalized power-state model [14] are given in Table II. All power levels were normalized to the deep-sleep state. Only DL traffic was generated, where traffic demand followed the 3GPP profiles in [14]. Three traffic profiles were defined in terms of mean PRB utilization:  

> •

Low traffic : 6.5% (matches 0<load ≤15 % in [14])  

> •

Light traffic : 25% (matches 15% <load ≤30 % in [14])  

> •

Medium traffic : 42% (matches 30% <load ≤50 % in [14]) 4TABLE I: Energy–performance taxonomy: capabilities vs. features. Timescales are indicative. 

Item Category Layer Used in Timescale A. Hardware capabilities (enablers) 

Radio sleep capabilities (Micro/Light/Deep) Capability RF/PHY B.3, C.1, C.3 μs–tens of ms ( ≤100 ms) 1

Multi-band PA hardware Capability RF FE B.3, C.4 tens of μs-ms 2

DVFS / DRS (compute) Capability BB/Edge B.2, C.3, C.5 μs–ms 1

Passive / smart cooling Capability Site standalone s–min 2

B. Features that create idle windows 

1. Lean NR design Feature PHY B.3, C.1, C.2 4 tens of ms ( ≤160 ms) 2

2. Architectural split Feature Arch B.3, B.4, C.2, C.5 s–min 3

3. Scheduling (control + data) Feature MAC/RRC C.1, C.3 , C.4 μs–100 ms 2

4. Traffic steering / load placement Feature RRM C.1–C.5 s–min 3

5. Dynamic spectrum sharing Feature PHY/RRM C.1, C.2, C.4 ms–tens of ms 2

C. Features that utilize idle windows 

1. ASMs (Micro/Light/Deep sleep) Feature RF/RRM – ms–tens of ms 1

2. Carrier shutdown Feature RF/RRM – ms–s 1, s–min 3

3. Massive-MIMO sleep Feature RF/MAC – ms–s 1, s–min 3

4. Dynamic power pooling Feature RF FE – tens of μs-ms 2

5. CU/DU compute pooling Feature Arch – s–min 31 Transition time (required time to ramp down and ramp up the hardware). 2 Control/periodicity (scheduling or control interval). 3 Control/orchestration            

> (cluster/cell/carrier orchestration interval).
> 4This is due to synchronization signal block (SSB)/system information block (SIB)-on-demand that can enable more aggressive cell/carrier dormancy. Numerology note: slot length scales with subcarrier spacing (e.g., 15 kHz, 1 slot is 1 ms; 30 kHz, 1 slot ≈0.5 ms), so slot-aligned figures translate accordingly. Medium traffic Light traffic Low traffic
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> Power consumption (relative-power-second)
> Baseline-μ Lean160-μ TG(10)-μ TG(10)-μ+DS
> TG(30)-μ TG(30)-μ+DS TG(60)-μ TG(60)-μ+DS

(a)      

> Medium traffic Light traffic Low traffic
> 0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1
> 1.2
> 1.4
> 1.6
> DL PDCP Throughput (Mb/s)
> Baseline Lean160 TG(10)
> TG(30) TG(60)

(b) 

Fig. 2: The impact of sleep modes, scheduling, and NR lean design under different traffic scenarios on the empirical distributions of (a) power consumption and (b) DL SDU PDCP throughput. Each box spans the 25th–75th percentiles, the horizontal line denotes the median, the circle denotes the mean, and the whiskers indicate the minimum and maximum values. Note that PRB utilization fluctuated over time, and the values above refer to the respective time-averaged levels. Follow-ing [14], deep sleep incurred a 50 ms transition time for ramping up and ramping down the corresponding hardware, each costing 1 relative-power-second. The transition time and energy for micro sleep were assumed to be negligible. While the evaluation focuses on a single carrier to isolate coordination effects, multi-carrier multi-cell deployments with mobility provide additional degrees of freedom, such as steer-ing latency-sensitive traffic to always-on carriers while aggres-sively gating others. This may mitigate latency–throughput trade-offs but requires tighter orchestration across carriers. Moreover, saving energy can affect neighboring cell KPIs such as load. Therefore, the orchestrator should consider neighbor-aware guardrails for feature orchestration. For our case study, we consider the following benchmarks:  

> •

Baseline : Vanilla simulations using the default signal-ing periodicities: PRACH 5 ms, SSB 20 ms, channel state information reference signal (CSI-RS) 5 ms, broadcast control channel (BCCH)/SIB1 50 ms.  

> •

Lean160 : Same as Baseline , but every signaling periodicity above is raised to 160 ms, realizing the NR 5TABLE II: Power states of gNB and simulation parameters                         

> Simulation parameters
> Bandwidth 20 MHz Frequency 3.5GHz Subcarrier spacing 30 kHz Slot duration 0.5ms Power 40 WNum. UEs 20 TX/RX chains 16 Num. samples 10 6
> OFF States ON States Power state Deep sleep Micro sleep Active TX Idle TX Active RX Idle RX
> Relative power 155 119.3 71.3 80.33 70.2

lean design principle to cut always-on transmissions.  

> •

TG( τ ): Builds on Lean160 and adds traffic-gating: the scheduler withholds non-priority traffic for a fixed inter-val τ ∈{ 10 , 30 , 60 } ms, releasing it when the timer expires or a high-priority traffic arrives. This extension prolongs consecutive idle times and improves the opportunity for deeper energy-saving modes. Each benchmark may appear in two variants: -μ , which assumes the RU supports only micro sleep, and -μ+DS , which assumes the RU can enter both micro and deep sleep (e.g., 

Lean160-μ+DS ). The μ+DS provides a lower bound on en-ergy consumption enabled by coordination, assuming perfect predictions and optimal decisions with no KPI degradation (due to deep sleep). In practice, a short-horizon prediction provides such information. Fig. 2a demonstrates the distribution of power consumption, summarizing 500 independent simulation seeds per bench-mark. The μ+DS distributions represent a lower bound: using offline knowledge of whether the preceding ≥50 ms interval was idle, we account the gNB as being in deep sleep. Thus, the results assume perfect short-horizon idleness prediction and optimal timing. However, with prediction errors, the achievable savings may reduce and/or KPIs may degrade. In both Baseline and Lean160 , micro- and deep-sleep benchmarks yield identical power consumption because nei-ther benchmark attains the ≥50 ms period required for deep sleep. Fig. 2a delivers four main takeaways:  

> •

Solely extending signaling periods yields little gains :With all periodicities stretched to 160 ms ( Lean160 ), mean power drops by up to 2% because of the micro sleeps (under the Low traffic profile) versus Baseline .Such an extension provides a sufficient interval to activate deep sleep. However, traffic arrival becomes the limiting factor. Hence, cutting signaling overhead is necessary but not sufficient for meaningful savings.  

> •

Traffic gating helps even with micro sleep alone : A 

10 ms gating window ( TG(10)-μ ) cuts mean power by roughly 10% at medium traffic. Expanding the window to 60 ms brings further benefit at medium traffic but little extra at Low or Light loads, where idle gaps are already long enough.  

> •

Deep sleep is the real lever : Allowing deep sleep in 

TG(60)-μ+DS slashes power consumption across all traffic regimes, easily outperforming every micro-sleep-only strategy.  

> •

Savings depend on coordinated features : Significant gains appear only when extended signaling, traffic gat-ing, and deep sleep work cooperatively. Assuming deep sleep, Lean160 with no traffic illustrates the most energy savings. However, under Low traffic, gating becomes important to manage the traffic for energy savings (e.g., a 30 ms gate offers virtually no advantage over 10 ms). Fig. 2b shows the distribution of PDCP service data unit (SDU) throughput for all benchmarks, and thus reveals the per-formance cost of the power savings seen in Fig. 2a. Under the Low traffic profile, TG(60) leaves every throughput statistic unchanged, even though it delivers the largest power reduction (i.e., 58 % compared to Baseline ). In the Light traffic profile, the same gating timer again preserves the mean and all upper percentiles but decreases the minimum throughput from 0.66 Mb/s ( Baseline ) to 0.26 Mb/s. By contrast, the Medium traffic profile shows a noticeable reduction of the entire distribution, confirming that long gating windows can result in reduced throughput at higher loads. These results show that substantial power savings can be realized with negligible throughput impact when the cell operates in Light or Low traffic, and the trade-off becomes significant only as traffic approaches the Medium level. Gating may cause extra latency, however, a large fraction of mobile traffic is latency-tolerant (e.g., buffered video streaming), for which TG(60) 

is acceptable. Moreover, since there are typically multiple configured carriers on a gNB, latency-sensitive flows can be steered to other carriers, allowing some carriers safely apply longer gating windows. V. O PEN ISSUES 

We summarize four open issues arising from feature design and orchestration. 

A. Energy Consumption Observability 

Achieving energy efficiency relies on predicting and orches-trating when and where idle windows exist, and estimating their payoff. Nevertheless, the demands of a single RAT or service may block deeper sleep modes activation, and differing traffic shares across digital, transport, and radio layers further complicate energy management among RATs/services. Today, energy consumption is typically measured using meters installed on physical nodes, whose processing resources are shared by multiple logical nodes (e.g., co-located cells or gNBs). However, feature optimizations often require finer-grained energy measurements (e.g., carrier-level measure-ments). This misalignment complicates attribution (as node-level measurements often fail to map to cell-level energy) and can obscure energy-performance trade-offs (e.g., Fig. 2). Promising directions include finer-granularity energy counters and a consistent split between static and load-dependent power. 

B. Traffic Dynamics 

Network traffic, service requirements, and the network sta-tus determine the required resources for operation. Network traffic can be modeled as the UE-aggregated data served in discrete sessions, each containing one or multiple UE 6payloads. We can categorize the sessions into three classes: i) large ( >20 MB forming ≈ 2% of total sessions) that demand intensive radio resources (e.g., high number of PRBs, transmit power), ii) medium ( 1–20 MB forming ≈ 3% of sessions) that require moderate resources, and iii) small ( <1 MB forming 

≈ 95% of traffic) that need minimal radio resources. Networks are designed around large sessions even though most sessions are small, driving disproportionate energy consumption to provision a minority traffic class. Additionally, short sessions may puncture otherwise viable sleep windows. This contrasts with the industry’s aim for zero energy at zero load. To address this issue, scheduling should become session-class aware and plan over short-horizon to create and preserve idle windows. Further study is needed to manage this traffic mix more energy-efficiently. 

C. Conflict Management 

Energy-saving features are typically designed locally (per node or function), yet dependencies on other network functions can create unintended interactions. For example, interactions among DSS, ASMs, carrier shutdown, and massive MIMO sleep can negate gains or degrade KPIs when activated together. Conflicts often arise from overlapping timers, in-compatible prerequisites, or “ping-pong” between policies. Conflict management can be realized locally or via a higher-level orchestrator. Such control mechanisms may include pre-activation “what-if” evaluation to further reduce risk, devising a policy graph, or post-activation rollbacks. 

D. ML for Energy Efficiency 1) Data availability and observability: Training models for energy-aware decisions requires accurate and timely mea-surements of energy consumption. However, energy is often measured at coarse aggregation points, such as the site or RU level while energy-saving actions are triggered at finer granularity, such as carrier, or cell. Where to place energy probes, how to aggregate measurements across layers, and what temporal granularity is sufficient for learning remain open questions. If measurements are delayed or too coarse, the resulting models become practically ineffective. 

2) Computational resources and latency: Energy-saving features inherently trade latency for energy-saving. Artificial intelligence-based orchestration adds additional delay due to data pre-processing, inference, and control signaling. Even if inference itself is fast, the cumulative latency may reduce the usable idle window or increase the risk of KPI degra-dation. Therefore, models must be designed with minimal computational footprint, placed close to the decision point, and explicitly account for computation-related latency when triggering actions. 

3) Delayed impact of actions: Unlike throughput or scheduling decisions, the impact of an energy-saving action is often observed only after some time, when energy consump-tion is measured over an interval. Moreover, observed changes in energy or KPIs may be influenced by reasons such as traffic variations, and mobility. This makes it difficult to attribute outcomes to specific actions, complicating model training, monitoring, and explainability. This requires model training and evaluation to consider delayed effects, uncertainty, and partial observability. ML techniques such as offline evaluation, and horizon-aware solutions (e.g., conservative reinforcement learning/bandits) are among the approaches addressing this issue. VI. C ONCLUSION 

Unlocking the full energy-saving potential of the RAN requires not only capable hardware but also tight coordination among interconnected features. In this article, we first provided a clear taxonomy of capabilities and features, separating those that create idle windows from those that utilize them, and then discussed how a single logical coordination node enables cooperation to improve energy saving. Our end-to-end results, conducted using a 3GPP-aligned simulator, confirmed that combining extended lean-NR signaling, traffic gating, and predictive wakeups with deep sleep delivers substantial energy savings while keeping throughput at a reasonable level. The use case study further indicates that well-orchestrated features working in harmony are a necessity for end-to-end energy-efficient cost-effective networks. REFERENCES [1] J. Malmodin et al. , “ICT sector electricity consumption and greenhouse gas emissions–2020 outcome,” Telecommunications Policy , vol. 48, no. 3, p. 102701, 2024. [2] P. Zhang et al. , “Toward net-zero carbon emissions in network AI for 6G and beyond,” IEEE Commun. Mag. , vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 58–64, 2024. [3] Environmental Engineering (EE); Assessment of mobile network energy efficiency , ETSI ES 203 228 V1.4.1, Apr. 2022. [4] Management and orchestration; Energy efficiency of 5G , 3GPP TS 28.310 v19.3.0, 2026. [5] P. Frenger et al. , “Energy performance of 6G radio access networks: A once in a decade opportunity,” White Paper, Ericsson, 11 2024. [On-line]. Available: https://www.ericsson.com/en/reports-and-papers/white-papers/energy-performance-of-6g-ran [6] P. Frenger et al. , “Assessment of alternatives for reducing energy consumption in Multi-RAT scenarios,” in IEEE Veh. Technol. Conf. ,2014, pp. 1–5. [7] L. M. Larsen et al. , “Toward greener 5G and beyond radio access networks—a survey,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc. , vol. 4, pp. 768– 797, 2023. [8] D. L´ opez-P´ erez et al. , “A survey on 5G radio access network energy efficiency: Massive MIMO, lean carrier design, sleep modes, and ma-chine learning,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tuts. , vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 653–697, 2022. [9] K. Sthankiya et al. , “A survey on AI-driven energy optimization in terrestrial next generation radio access networks,” IEEE Access , vol. 12, pp. 157 540–157 555, 2024. [10] S. Demel et al. , “Green future networks: A roadmap to energy ef-ficient mobile networks,” Alliance, NGMN, Tech. Rep., 07 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.ngmn.org/wp-content/uploads/GFN Energy Efficiency Roadmap V1.0.pdf [11] M. Masoudi et al. , “Green mobile networks for 5G and beyond,” IEEE Access , vol. 7, pp. 107 270–107 299, 2019. [12] R. K. Saha et al. , “Dynamic spectrum sharing for 5G NR and 4G LTE coexistence-a comprehensive review,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc. ,vol. 5, pp. 795–835, 2024. [13] ¨O. T. Demir et al. , “Cell-free massive MIMO in O-RAN: Energy-aware joint orchestration of cloud, fronthaul, and radio resources,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. , vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 356–372, 2024. [14] 3GPP, “Study on network energy savings for NR,” TR 38.864, 2023, v18.1.0. [15] S. Wesemann et al. , “Energy efficient extreme MIMO: Design goals and directions,” IEEE Commun. Mag. , vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 132–138, 2023. 

7