Title: Semantic Communication for 6G Networks: A Trade-off between Distortion Criticality and Information Representability

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.29293v1

Published Time: Wed, 01 Apr 2026 00:33:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# Semantic Communication for 6G Networks: A Trade-off between Distortion Criticality and Information Representability 

Faizan Shafi , Rahul Jashvantbhai Pandya , Christo Kurisummoottil Thomas , Sridhar Iyer 

Abstract —In this work, a self-attention based conditional gen-erative adversarial network (SA–cGAN) framework for the sixth generation (6G) semantic communication system is proposed, explicitly designed to balance the trade-off between distortion criticality and information representability under varying chan-nel conditions. The proposed SA–cGAN model continuously learns compact semantic representations by jointly considering semantic importance, reconstruction distortion, and channel quality, enabling adaptive selection of semantic tokens for trans-mission. A knowledge graph is integrated to preserve contextual relationships and enhance semantic robustness, particularly in low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) regimes. The resulting optimiza-tion framework incorporates continuous relaxation, submodular semantic selection, and principled constraint handling, allowing efficient semantic resource allocation under bandwidth and multi-constraint conditions. The simulation results show that, although SA–cGAN achieves modest syntactic bilingual evaluation under-study scores at low SNR to approximately 0.72 at 20 dB, it significantly outperforms conventional and JSCC based schemes in semantic metrics, with semantic similarity, semantic accuracy, and semantic completeness consistently improving above 0.90 with SNR. Additionally, the model exhibits adaptive compression behavior, aggressively reducing redundant content while pre-serving critical semantic information to maintain fidelity. The convergence of training loss further validates the stable and efficient learning of semantic representations. Overall, the results confirm that the proposed SA–cGAN model effectively captures distortion invariant semantic representations and dynamically adapts transmitted content based on distortion criticality and information representability for meaning centric communication in future 6G networks. 

Index Terms —6G Semantic Communication, Conditional Gen-erative Adversarial Network, Resource Allocation, Attention Network, Information Representability, Distortion Criticality. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# THE sixth generation (6G) communication networks aim to achieve unprecedented objectives, including ultra-high data rates, improved energy efficiency, ultra-high user connectivity density, reliability, and ultra-low latency [1], [2], [3]. However, Shannon’s information theory establishes 

(Corresponding author: Faizan Shafi )Faizan Shafi and Rahul Jashvantbhai Pandya are with the Department of Electrical, Electronics and Communications Engineering, Indian In-stitute of Technology Dharwad, Dharwad, Karnataka 580011, India (e-mail: ee23dp004@iitdh.ac.in; rpandya@iitdh.ac.in). Christo Kurisummoottil Thomas is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, MA, USA (e-mail: cthomas2@wpi.edu). Sridhar Iyer is with the Department of ECE, SGBIT, Belagavi, Karnataka 590010, India (e-mail: sridhariyer@sgbit.edu.in). This work was supported in part by the Department of Telecommunication (DoT), Ministry of Communications, Government of India under the Telecom Technology Development Fund (TTDF) the scheme implemented through TCOE India under the grant TTDF/6G/48 and IGSTC-04918. 

fundamental limits on reliable bit-level transmission over a communication channel, primarily focusing on maximizing data rates within these theoretical bounds [4] and [5]. In contrast, with the rapid increase in internet users, internet of things (IoT) devices, and data-intensive intelligent appli-cations, future 6G networks must address not only higher data demands but also reliability and resource efficiency requirements. Rather than trying to exceed Shannon’s lim-its, emerging research explores alternative communication paradigms that redefine the optimization objective itself [6] and [7]. In this context, semantic communication (SemCom) has gained significant attention as a promising approach that shifts the focus from accurate transmission of raw bits to preservation and reconstruction of meaning at the receiver [8], [9], [10]. By optimizing communication resources with respect to semantic relevance rather than symbol-level fidelity, such systems address a fundamentally different objective and evaluation criterion [11]. This shift in perspective motivates the exploration of semantic-aware encoding, transmission, and decoding strategies for next-generation wireless systems. In SemCom systems, a key challenge lies in bridging the gap between high-level semantic meaning and the low-level physical representations required for transmission [12], [13], [14]. Existing approaches often struggle to ensure that abstract semantic concepts are represented in a form that is both interpretable and efficiently processable by learning based communication modules, particularly under bandwidth and channel constraints [15] and [16]. Moreover, preserving se-mantic intent while adapting to dynamically varying channel conditions remains nontrivial, as excessive compression may lead to semantic loss, whereas conservative transmission incurs significant resource overhead [17] and [18]. These challenges further complicate 6G networks, including ultra-dense IoT deployments, autonomous systems, and intelligent services, where devices exhibit diverse capabilities, channel conditions, and semantic requirements [19] and [20]. Addressing these issues requires semantic-aware communication paradigms that can intelligently align semantic importance with resource availability while remaining robust to semantic distortion and channel uncertainty. Such semantic-aware and learning-driven communication paradigms are increasingly recognized as fundamental enablers for emerging 6G use cases [21] and [22]. 

A. Related Works 

In recent years, extensive research has explored SemCom and artificial intelligence (AI) enabled transmission frame-

> arXiv:2603.29293v1 [eess.SP] 31 Mar 2026 2

works as promising alternatives to traditional bit-centric de-signs for supporting emerging intelligent and data-intensive applications [23] and [24]. The authors in [25], have proposed a SemCom system called MR DeepSC, leveraging deep neural networks (DNN) to enhance performance in multi-user scenar-ios. They have adopted a semantic recognizer, which is based on a pretrained model, to differentiate users and have made use of transfer learning (TL) as a way of training receiver networks faster. The simulation findings have highlighted the increased performance of the system in different channel environments, which is most prominent in the situation where low signal-to-noise ratios (SNR) prevail. However, there is limited discus-sion on the potential limitations of the TL approach used to train receiver networks, which could affect the generalizability of the model. To overcome spectral scarcity in 6G networks, [26] explores the potential of SemCom to improve transmis-sion reliability and efficiency in 6G networks, particularly in interference prone environments. The study proposes a matching game framework for resource allocation (RA) to optimize bandwidth efficiency. However, the work does not fully explore the impact of varying channel quality conditions on the performance of the SemCom system, which is crucial for optimizing RA schemes. In addition, the authors have not addressed the potential limitations of the semantic extraction and retrieval process, particularly in terms of the accuracy of the similarity coefficient used to evaluate performance. The study in [27] presents an overview of semantic and task-oriented communications, highlighting the integration of message semantics and communication goals in system design. It discusses the role of information theory and deep learning (DL) in enhancing communication efficiency across various sources of information such as images, text, and video. How-ever, there is a lack of semantics-aware decision-making in real-time reconstruction policies, which could enhance the ef-ficiency of communication systems by considering the context of information at both the source and the receiver. It does not address the implications of distributed parameter estimation under rate constraints, leaving a gap in understanding how to optimize performance in such scenarios. In turn, [28] discusses the evolution of communication technologies from a technical to a semantic level, proposing a novel model for SemCom using conceptual spaces and functional compression. It does not explore the implications of semantic errors in detail, par-ticularly how they affect overall communication efficiency in various environments, which is crucial for advancing SemCom systems. The exploration of equivalence relations and efficient semantic encodings is noted as an area that requires further investigation, indicating that the current study does not fully address this aspect. Furthermore, [29] proposed an end-to-end SemCom based image transmission system that considers the physical charac-teristics of the channel. The proposed method uses semantic segmentation at the transmitter and a pre-trained generative adversarial network (GAN) at the receiver to reconstruct realistic images, trained on the COCO-Stuff dataset. By trans-mitting only the segmentation map instead of the full image, the system achieves notable bandwidth savings compared to conventional methods. The study also examines the effects of channel distortions and quantization noise, offering valuable insights into bridging SemCom with real world transmission challenges. The authors of [30], have proposed the use of conditional generative adversarial networks (cGANs) to model unknown or complex wireless channels in an end-to-end learn-ing framework, allowing transmitter gradients to flow through a learned channel surrogate. This demonstrates the power of cGANs for channel modeling and DNN based transceiver design, but it focuses on channel emulation rather than se-mantic adaptation or knowledge graph (KG) aware token selection. The Deep joint source channel coding (JSCC) family [31], develops learned joint source–channel encoders/decoders that significantly improve symbol-level reconstruction (im-ages/text) under noisy channels. These methods excel at end-to-end reconstruction and rate adaptation, but they remain largely symbol-centric, they do not explicitly model semantic importance, KGs, or distortion vs. representability trade-offs that determine which semantic units to send. Several studies [32] use GAN variants (WGAN, WGAN-GP) to synthesize realistic channel realizations or to generate channel statistics for training. These show GANs effectiveness in capturing channel distributions, but they focus on channel modeling or dataset synthesis rather than on semantic encoding/decoding and KG-aligned, attention-guided semantic selection for end-to-end meaning preservation. The study in [33] formulates KG based semantic transmission schemes that extract and transmit graph structured semantics to improve interpretation at the receiver. These schemes show how KG alignment improves semantic robustness, yet they typically do not combine KG guidance with adaptive generative models and self-attention token selection under a joint optimization framework. To summarize, the authors have used KG for information rep-resentation, but not co-optimized with cGAN driven RA and submodular selection. Recent works [34] investigate atten-tion mechanisms and importance-aware selection to prioritize tokens or features for semantic transmission. These works demonstrate that attention can drive semantic compression, but they generally stop short of integrating a generative channel-aware model for dynamic symbol generation and do not pro-vide a principled optimization treatment balancing distortion criticality and information representability for RA. As is evident, no prior work has explored self-attention based conditional generative adversarial network (SA-cGAN) enabled RA strategies for 6G SemCom. Existing SemCom studies focus primarily on semantic encoding and recon-struction, but they often overlook the problem of adaptive semantic RA under physical channel constraints. In particular, most existing approaches do not explicitly model the trade-off between semantic fidelity, reconstruction distortion, and channel reliability when selecting which semantic elements should be transmitted. Moreover, while attention-based models can identify important semantic tokens, they typically lack a generative mechanism to adapt the transmitted semantic representations to varying channel conditions. Motivated by these limitations, this work proposes a SA-cGAN driven RA methodology for 6G wireless networks, specifically addressing the trade-offs between information representability and distor-tion criticality (detailed in section II-A). 3

B. Key Contributions 

The main contribution of this work is the development of a novel SemCom framework that explicitly balances distortion criticality and information representability under practical 6G channel constraints using a SA–cGAN model. By integrating knowledge driven semantic extraction with adaptive generative modeling, the proposed framework enables efficient and mean-ing centric communication as an alternative to conventional bit level transmission approaches. Moreover, cGAN’s unique capability for feedback based dynamic adaptation of semantic representation will provide efficient RA. The key contributions of the current article are as follows: 1) We propose a SemCom system that utilizes a KG oriented SA-cGAN to encode and decode information semantics, thereby reducing semantic ambiguity. This operation ensures that semantic selection is not solely driven by statistical attention, but is explicitly con-strained by symbolic semantic structure encoded in the KG. 2) We introduce an intelligent, optimized, and performance enhanced SA-cGAN enabled resilient system model with adaptive RA strategies for 6G SemCom networks. In the current study, with regard to RA, we mainly focus on bandwidth as the primary resource. 3) We furthermore propose the design of an SA-cGAN based rate adaptation mechanism that dynamically ad-justs transmission rates based on both semantic con-tent and network conditions addressing the trade-offs between information representability and distortion crit-icality. The framework supports multiple adaptation strategies, including conservative (high distortion, low representability), moderate (medium distortion and rep-resentability), and aggressive approach (low distortion, high representability). 4) We solve the dynamic and rigorous optimization prob-lem via continuous relaxation, submodular selection, Lagrangian dual formulation, and Karush–Kuhn–Tucker (KKT) based characterization, thereby explicitly cou-pling information representability and distortion critical-ity with semantic RA. 5) Extensive simulation results demonstrate that the pro-posed SA–cGAN framework achieves substantial gains in semantic oriented metrics. In particular, semantic similarity improves from ≈ 0.23 to over 0.93, while semantic accuracy and semantic completeness increase consistently from around 0.18 to above 0.90, validat-ing robust semantic transmission under varying channel conditions. The rest of this paper is structured as follows: section II discusses the system model, while section III introduces the performance metrics and formulates the optimization problem. In section IV, solution for optimization problem is detailed followed by section V, which presents and discusses the obtained results. Finally, section VI concludes the paper. The key notations used throughout the article are expanded in Table I.                                                                   

> TABLE I KEY NOTATIONS
> Notation Interpretation
> Hs(·)Semantic encoder
> Hc(·)Channel encoder
> CSA–cGAN (·)SA-cGAN model
> XiOriginal text required to be sent to user i
> ˆXiDecoded/received text
> VGlobal vocabulary or token set
> xi,n Token nin textual data Xi
> NiTotal number of tokens in textual data Xi
> ei,j Entity jin text Xi
> ei,k Entity kin text Xi
> ri,jk Relation between entity ei,j and entity ei,k
> EiNumber of entities in text Xi
> RiNumber of relations in text Xi
> GiSemantic information of textual data Xi
> GiNumber of semantic triples in Gi
> εgiSemantic triples gin Gi
> vgi,b Token b in semantic triple εgi
> Sgi,j Number of tokens in entity egi,j
> Sgi,jk Number of tokens in relation rgi,jk
> EEntity
> RRelation
> KKnowledge graph
> rkSemantic symbol
> SSelected semantic token set
> αiSelf-attention/semantic importance score
> ταSemantic importance threshold
> siBinary semantic selection variable
> G(·)cGAN generator
> D(·)cGAN decoder
> Psrc( ·)Probability distribution over the set of semantic
> Rin source KG
> Pdest( ·)Probability distribution over the set of semantic
> Rin destination KG
> BΦBERT model
> log BLEU iBLEU score
> Sim iSemantic similarity
> Acc iSemantic accuracy
> Comp iSemantic completeness
> LIR Information representability loss
> LDC Distortion criticality loss

II. S YSTEM MODEL 

We consider a point-to-point SA-cGAN enabled 6G Sem-Com model, where a source node transmits textual information to a destination node over a wireless channel, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The objective of the system is not only to reliably deliver raw symbols, but to preserve the semantic meaning of the transmitted information under multi-constraints. In this model, the source of semantic information generates raw information that contains latent semantic aspects inherent in the data, such as contextual and relational meaning. The attention mechanism and the KG composed of entities and relations (detailed in section II-C) within the semantic encoder is then employed to identify and extract the most relevant se-mantic representations from this raw information by capturing long-range dependencies and contextual relationships. Rather than raw symbols, these extracted semantic representations form the input to the cGAN. In the proposed framework, 4 

> Fig. 1. System model

the cGAN learns a conditional mapping between semantic representations and compact symbolic embeddings that are optimized for transmission under bandwidth, distortion, and SNR constraints. RA is implicitly realized through this condi-tional generation process, where the cGAN adapts the number, structure, and fidelity of transmitted semantic symbols based on distortion criticality and channel conditions. As a result, essential semantic elements are generated and prioritized for transmission, enabling efficient bandwidth utilization while maintaining reliability and quality of service (QoS). As shown in (1), employing KG, the SA-cGAN assisted transmitter will encode the extracted semantics of the original information 

(i) through the semantic encoder Hs(i). The output is then processed to perform channel encoding through the chan-nel encoder Hc(Hs(i)) . Subsequently, the SA-cGAN model 

CSA–cGAN (Hc(Hs(i))) is used during the semantic and channel encoding for optimal performance, and transmits the encoded information (I).

Iencoded = CSA–cGAN (Hc(Hs(i))) (1) However, as shown in (2), employing SA-cGAN with KG, the receiver will decode, extract the semantics, and restore the original information (i) with reduced semantic and channel noise impacts on transmitted rates and QoS through dynamic RA and semantic representation adaptation. 

idecoded = CSA–cGAN (H−1 

> s

(H−1 

> c

(I))) (2) This semantic noise is considered a misinterpretation of se-mantics, which can be reduced by transmitting more semantic representation if needed to overcome the rate failures for increased rate resiliency. Rate failures refer to instances where the effective transmission rate drops below the threshold required to preserve semantic fidelity, often due to channel im-pairments or semantic distortion. However, the rate resiliency 

of the system is formally defined as its ability to consis-tently deliver seamless communication while maintaining a committed bit rate above a predefined threshold. Semantic adaptation in the proposed framework is governed by an explicit trade-off between information representability and distortion criticality. Information representability reflects the degree to which the selected semantic representations preserve the original meaning, while distortion criticality captures the system’s tolerance to semantic degradation under bandwidth and channel constraints. When a channel is noise-free, the SA-cGAN optimizes the transmitted semantic representations to reduce bandwidth occupancy and energy consumption. Alternatively, when the channel is noisy, SA-cGAN performs the adaptation of the semantic representation and transmits more semantic elements that optimize semantic similarity, improving QoS against noise. To reduce the impact of noise, bandwidth utilization, and energy consumption, essential se-mantic elements will be transmitted, enticing the optimal resources, that will be sufficient to extract the actual meaning of the information at the receiver. The SA–cGAN adaptively navigates this trade-off by conditioning semantic generation on distortion criticality and network state, allowing flexible operation between conservative, moderate, and aggressive se-mantic adaptation approaches detailed in a subsequent section, depending on the desired balance between robustness and semantic fidelity. 

A. SA-cGAN Enabled 6G Semantic Communication 

We consider a network composed of multiple base stations (BS 1,BS 2,.....,BS n) and mobile users (MU 1,MU 2,.....,MU n), as shown in Fig. 2. The transmission medium is subject to various impairments, including channel noise and interference. In our framework, these diverse sources of degradation are collectively modeled as distortion, capturing their combined effect. When the accumulated distortion exceeds tolerable limits, the active link experiences rate degradation, and if the distortion becomes severe enough to prevent sustaining the committed rate, a rate failure event occurs. This event is detected by a proactive rate failure detection module, which signals the SA-cGAN controller to initiate a remediation and rate restoration phase. The SA-cGAN controller acts as a decision making entity that monitors channel quality (SNR), distortion criticality, and semantic reconstruction performance, and accordingly adjusts the semantic encoding strategy by selecting additional or refined semantic representations for transmission. Through this closed loop control mechanism, the SA-cGAN encoder continuously seeks optimal seman-tic representations that balance the trade-offs among SNR, committed bit rate, distortion criticality, and information rep-resentability, thereby ensuring resilient SemCom. As shown in Fig. 2, different strategies can be adopted: a conservative approach (high distortion and low information representabil-ity), a moderate approach (medium distortion and information representability), or an aggressive approach (low distortion and high information representability). Specifically, we can express the relationship as follows: If the information representability is low, this implies that the information representability loss (detailed in section III-B) is high. In such a case, the system should transmit a larger number of semantics, leading to a high semantic representation. Conversely, if the information representability is high, the corresponding information repre-sentability loss becomes low. In this case, fewer semantics need to be transmitted, resulting in a low semantic represen-tation, lower bandwidth, and lower energy consumption. On the other hand, when distortion criticality is high, a larger 5 

> Fig. 2. SA-cGAN enabled 6G semantic communication model

number of semantic units must be transmitted, whereas fewer semantics are sufficient when distortion criticality is low. This trade-off can be intuitively explained using a teacher–student analogy. If a student already possesses the prerequisite knowl-edge in a course, the teacher can convey the intended concepts using fewer explanations, as the information representability is high and the information representability loss is low. In this case, even if minor distortions (unclear explanation) occur, the student can still infer the correct meaning, implying low distortion criticality and requiring fewer semantic elements to be transmitted. Conversely, if the student lacks prerequi-site knowledge, information representability is low and the conveyed content becomes highly sensitive to distortion. Un-der such high distortion criticality, the teacher must provide more detailed explanations and repetitions to ensure correct understanding. Building on this principle, when improving the SNR through conventional means such as power control is impractical, the system compensates by employing semantic rate adaptation. In such cases, additional semantic features are transmitted to enrich the semantic representation and enhance robustness against noise. Although this strategy differs fun-damentally from traditional communication paradigms, it is particularly effective in environments characterized by severe noise or unrecoverable channel impairments. 

B. Semantic Information Extraction 

A token xi,n is used to denote a word, symbol, or punctu-ation mark within textual data. Consequently, the content that the BS must deliver to user i is represented as an ordered sequence of tokens, expressed in (3), as [18]; 

Xi = {xi, 1, x i, 2, . . . , x i,n , . . . , x i,N i }, ∀xi,n ∈ V, (3) where V denotes the collection of tokens within a cor-pus, and Ni indicates the total number of tokens in Xi.For instance, if the BS needs to send the sentence “DNN is trained on large dataset.” to user i, then, we obtain: 

Xi = {[DN N ], [is ], [trained ], [on ], [large ], [dataset ], [.]},where xi, 1 = [ DN N ], x i, 2 = [ is ], x i, 3 = [ trained ], x i, 4 =[on ], x i, 5 = [ large ], x i, 6 = [ dataset ], and xi, 7 = [ .].In our framework, the semantic information extracted from a textual data is modeled by a KG ( K) [35]. Hence, the semantic information is formed by a collection of nodes along with a collection of edges, as shown in Fig. 3. Each node within the semantic information corresponds to an entity that denotes an object or a concept in the real world. Hereafter, we define entity j which is a subsequence of the text Xi

as ei,j . For instance, in Fig. 3, the phrase “large dataset” is treated as an entity composed of two tokens from the sample text. An information extraction system, such as the scientific information extractor described in [36] can be employed to identify the set Ei of Ei entities in text Xi.Edges denote the relationships connecting pairs of entities. For any two identified entities (ei,j , e i,k ), j̸ = k, the BS must find the relation ri,jk ∈ R i between them, where Ri is the set of Ri relations involved in text Xi. For example, in Fig. 3, the relation between entity “deep neural network” and “large dataset” can be formulated as “trained on”. It is important to note that the relationships (i.e., the edges of the semantic information) are directional, which means ri,jk ̸ = ri,kj .We assume that there is a predefined set R that includes all possible relations in the corpus, where each relation is expressed as a two-token sequence such as “trained on”, “used for”, “part of”, and “related to”, etc., as demonstrated in [36]. The set R contains a finite number of relation types extracted from the corpus and knowledge base, i.e., |R| < ∞, and its cardinality depends on the application domain and dataset. In our framework, R is constructed from the training corpus and associated knowledge base and includes commonly occurring semantic relations. The number of distinct relations is in the or-der of low hundreds. However, these relations are semantically clustered into higher-level predicate categories during training, which limits the effective classification complexity. Therefore, for any given pair of entities ei,j and ei,k in the original text 

Xi, the relation ri,jk between ei,j and ei,k can be obtained by classification algorithms such as convolutional neural networks [37]. Here, the relation classification algorithm receives as input the sentence that includes the pair of entities from the original text, and its output is the predefined two-token relation summarizing the connection between them. We assume that the information extraction system is capable of detecting the majority of semantically relevant entities in the source text. Consequently, the triples structured as “entity–relation–entity” serve to capture and convey the meaning of the original text. Using the identified entities together with the derived rela-tions, the semantic information of the textual data Xi can be represented as shown in (4), [18]; 

Gi = {ε1 

> i

, . . . , ε gi , . . . , ε Gi 

> i

}, (4) where, εgi = ( egi,j , r gi,jk , e gi,k ), ∀egi,j , e gi,k ∈Ei, j̸ = k, ∀rgi,jk ∈ R i is a semantic triple and Gi is the number of semantic triples in Gi. Since each entity (e.g., 

egi,j or egi,k ) and each relation rgi,jk consist of a sequence of tokens (e.g., ei,j = {[deep ], [neural ], [network ]}, ei,k =

{[large ], [dataset ]}, and ri,jk = {[trained ], [on ]}), triple εgi

can be expressed as εgi = {vgi, 1, . . . , v gi,b , . . . , v gi,B gi

}, where 

vgi,b ∈ V denotes the bth token within the semantic triple εgi

and Bgi = Sgi,j +Sgi,jk +Sgi,k , with Sgi,j , Sgi,k and Sgi,jk represent 6 

> Fig. 3. An illustration of source text along with the derived semantic information.

the number of tokens in the entity egi,j , egi,k and relation rgi,jk ,respectively. Then, the total number of tokens in the semantic information Gi is given by (5), [18]; 

Z(Gi) = 

> Gi

X

> g=1



Sgi,j + Sgi,k + Sgi,jk 



(5) As illustrated in Fig. 3, the extracted semantic information occupies substantially less data space compared to the original text (i.e., Z(Gi) ≪ Ni). This is because, although semantic triples are constructed using tokens from the source text, Gi

does not preserve all tokens in Xi. Instead, it is a selective semantic abstraction in which only entity and relation tokens are preserved. Tokens that do not contribute to semantic meaning, such as auxiliary verbs, determiners, and redundant descriptive phrases, are excluded. Consequently, even though semantic triples reuse tokens from the original vocabulary, the total number of transmitted tokens is significantly reduced. This reduction arises because the two-token relations that link the pairs of entities in Gi effectively eliminate the redundant context present in the original textual data Xi.

C. KG Guided Semantic Grounding and Token Selection 

In section II-B, we examined the process of interpreting the relationships between entities, which is used to build the KG as K = {E , R, E} , where E, R, and E are used to represent entities, relations, and entities, respectively. Next, in order to physically deliver the semantic information Gi, it is necessary to form a sentence applying the defined semantic information extraction mechanism. As an illustration with an example of DNN training, the semantic relation learned by the system may be “DNN, large dataset” connected by the relation/attribute “trained on”. The information we aim to deliver corresponds to the sentence: “DNN is trained on large dataset”. Specifically, semantic extraction was used to identify E and R from the input text and organize them into a KG representation. Although this symbolic structure captures high-level semantic relationships, it cannot be transmitted directly over a physical communication channel. Therefore, a grounding mechanism is required to map symbolic semantic elements into neural representations that can be encoded, transmitted, and de-coded reliably. In this work, KG guided semantic grounding refers to the process of anchoring symbolic elements derived from the K (E and R) to their corresponding neural token embeddings, rather than grounding them in formal logical semantics. Specifically, grounding is performed during the semantic selection stage by explicitly aligning self-attention scores with KG derived semantic relevance. This ensures that tokens corresponding to meaningful semantic units, such as, entities and predicate relations are prioritized for transmission. Let X = {x1, x 2, . . . , x n} denote the tokenized input sentence, and let K = ( E, R) denote the KG constructed from 

X, where E is the set of extracted entities and R is the set of relations between them. Each token xi has a corresponding embedding vector ui and a self-attention/semantic importance score αi (detailed in section III-B). Grounding is realized by jointly evaluating αi and the token’s presence in K.Formally, a token xi is considered grounded if it corresponds to either (i) an entity in E or (ii) a relation in R. During semantic selection, such grounded tokens are assigned higher priority, while non-grounded tokens e.g., function words or syntactically necessary but semantically redundant tokens are deprioritized. This grounding-aware selection is implemented as a KG guided filtering and ranking operation applied to the self-attention scores (provided αi ≥ τα) prior to semantic symbol generation. Concretely, grounding is implemented through a KG aware selection function that maps the tuple 

(αi, x i, K) −→ si ∈ { 0, 1}, where si = 1 (detailed in section III-B) indicates that token xi is selected for semantic transmission. This operation ensures that semantic selection is not solely driven by statistical attention, but is explicitly constrained by symbolic semantic structure encoded in the KG. The selected grounded embeddings {ui | si = 1 } form the input to the SA–cGAN model, which learns compact semantic symbols for transmission. In this work, a semantic symbol refers to a compact latent representation generated by the cGAN from selected KG-grounded token embeddings. Unlike conventional modulation symbols that represent bit sequences, semantic symbols encode meaning-aware representations that are optimized with respect to distortion criticality and infor-mation representability prior to channel transmission. In this way, grounding acts as an interface between symbolic semantic representations and sub-symbolic neural encoding, ensuring that only semantically meaningful content is forwarded to the generative model. It is important to emphasize that this grounding mechanism does not rely on formal logical inference, first-order logic, or fuzzy semantics as presented in [38] and [39]. Instead, grounding is achieved through KG-guided neural selection, where KG E and R provide semantic constraints that guide the attention-based αi used for token selection. This approach remains computationally efficient and well aligned with the data-driven nature of the proposed SA–cGAN framework. By incorporating KG-based semantic structure during selection, the system prioritizes semantically meaningful tokens while reducing redundant information, thus improving semantic transmission efficiency. 7

D. Channel Model 

The robustness of the proposed SA-cGAN model is evalu-ated under Rayleigh fading channel. It is assumed that the transmission occurs in a dense environment consisting of multiple buildings and other surrounding obstacles. Hence, there may occur multiple scatterers resulting in a time-varying multipath fading channel which is assumed to be a Rayleigh fading channel. Let rk denote the semantic symbol transmitted at a time instance k, then the corresponding signal received at the receiver, as shown in (6), is given by 

yk = hkrk + nk, (6) where hk ∼ CN (0 , 1) denotes the Rayleigh fading coefficient, and nk ∼ CN (0 , σ 2

> n

) represents additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN). For AWGN channels, hk = 1, whereas for Rayleigh channels it follows a fading distribution [40] and [41]. This model captures both noise limited and fading dominated prop-agation conditions and is consistent with common SemCom modeling practices. Moreover, after transmission through the Rayleigh fading channel and noise corruption, the receiver per-forms channel decoding followed by semantic reconstruction to recover the textual output ˆXi. The effectiveness of this end-to-end semantic transmission process is evaluated using the performance metrics, which are introduced next. III. P ERFORMANCE METRICS AND PROBLEM 

FORMULATION 

A. Performance Metrics 

In SemCom, successful transmission must be evaluated at multiple levels because preserving meaning is fundamentally different from merely reconstructing symbols. A single metric cannot fully characterize semantic fidelity (i.e., preservation of intended meaning) under bandwidth and channel constraints. Therefore, we evaluated the performance of the proposed method using four complementary metrics: bilingual evalu-ation understudy (BLEU) score , semantic similarity , semantic accuracy , and semantic completeness each capturing a distinct aspect of performance. Although some previous works loosely interpret BLEU as a measure of semantic accuracy [18], BLEU is in fact a syntactic n-gram overlap metric and is not equivalent to token-level semantic accuracy. Therefore, BLEU and semantic accuracy are related but not equivalent. However, BLEU does not capture semantic equivalence un-der paraphrasing or lexical substitution. For this reason, we additionally employ semantic similarity to measure sentence-level meaning preservation, semantic accuracy to quantify token-level correctness (precision), and semantic completeness to measure token-level coverage (recall). This multi-metric evaluation ensures that the proposed SA–cGAN framework is assessed not only for symbol reconstruction, but also for meaningful and contextually faithful semantic transmission. For clarity, we distinguish these metrics formally as follows. 

1) BLEU Score (Syntactic Fidelity): BLEU measures the preservation of the surface-level linguistic structure by count-ing n-gram matches between the decoded sentence ˆXi and the original sentence Xi. It is sensitive to word ordering and phrase continuity, and therefore reflects syntactic similarity rather than semantic meaning. BLEU is useful for evaluating symbol-level (i.e., token) reconstruction, but it cannot capture paraphrasing or meaning preservation. For the transmitted sentence Xi with size Ni and the decoded sentence ˆXi with size ˆNi, the BLEU as shown in (7), can be expressed as 

log BLEU i = min 1 − ˆNi

Ni

, 0

!

+

> N

X

> n=1

un log p(i) 

> n

, (7) where un is the weights of n-grams and p(i) 

> n

is the n-grams score, defined in (8), as 

p(i) 

> n

=

P 

> k

min 



Ck( ˆXi), C k(Xi)

P 

> k

min 



Ck( ˆXi)

 , (8) where Ck(·) denotes the count of occurrences of the k-th element in the n-gram sequence. The BLEU score evaluates the variation in n-grams between two sentences, where n-grams represent sequences of n consecutive words used for comparison. For example, for sentence “This is my car,” 1-gram: “This” “is” “my” and “car” 2-grams: “This is” “is my” and “my car”. The same principle can be followed for the rest. The BLEU score yields a value between 0 and 1, reflecting the degree of similarity between the decoded text and the orig-inal transmitted text, where a score of 1 represents perfect cor-respondence. However, few human translations will attain the score of 1, as minor word differences do not necessarily alter the overall meaning of a sentence. For example, the sentences “I bought a new car” and “I bought a new automobile” convey the same meaning but result in different BLEU scores due to lexical variation. To better capture such semantic equivalence, we introduce an additional metric semantic similarity, which operates at the sentence level to complement the BLEU score. 

2) Semantic Similarity (Semantic-Level Meaning Preser-vation): A single word may convey different meanings de-pending on its context. For example, the word mouse car-ries distinct interpretations in the domains of biology and computing. Traditional embedding methods, such as word2vec 

[42], are unable to effectively capture such polysemy, as they represent each word with a fixed numerical vector that does not adapt to contextual variations. To capture this characteristic, semantic similarity is introduced as a new metric that measures how closely the meanings of two sentences align. Semantic similarity as shown in (9), computes the cosine similarity between contextual sentence embeddings e.g., bidirectional encoder representations from transformers (BERT), i.e., 

Sim i = BΦ(Xi) · BΦ( ˆXi)⊤

∥BΦ(Xi)∥ ∥ BΦ( ˆXi)∥ (9) where BΦ denotes the BERT model [43], which is a large-scale pre-trained network comprising billions of parameters, utilized for semantic feature extraction. The semantic simi-larity metric defined in (9) yields a value between 0 and 1, indicating the degree of resemblance between the decoded sen-tence and the transmitted sentence, where 1 signifies complete similarity and 0 denotes no semantic correspondence between 

Xi and ˆXi. In contrast to BLEU, BERT has been trained on billions of sentences, enabling it to effectively learn and represent semantic information by generating context-specific 8

vector representations. Additionally, unlike BLEU, this metric is invariant to synonyms, word order, or paraphrasing, and therefore reflects how well the meaning of the sentence survives the SA–cGAN semantic encoding, channel effects, and decoding. 

3) Semantic Accuracy (Token-Level Precision): Semantic accuracy as shown in (10), measures the proportion of decoded tokens that are correct with respect to the source sentence, i.e., 

Acc i =

P 

> xi,n ∈V

min( σ( ˆXi, x i,n ), σ (Xi, x i,n )) 

P 

> xi,n ∈V

σ( ˆXi, x i,n ) (10) where, V denotes the global vocabulary or token set used for counting, which includes all words, subwords, and punctuation tokens defined by the tokenizer. Formally, V =

{xi, 1, x i, 2, . . . }. Although the summation in (10) extends over all xi,n ∈ V , in practice it is restricted to tokens appearing in either Xi or ˆXi to reduce computational complexity. Each 

xi,n ∈ V represents a single token (word, subword, or punctu-ation mark) from the vocabulary, and the summation accumu-lates token-level matches across the entire sentence. The func-tion σ( ˆXi, x i,n ) denotes the count of token xi,n in the decoded (received) sentence ˆXi, where σ( ˆXi, x i,n ) ∈ { 0, 1, 2, . . . }.For instance, if ˆXi = {the , cat , cat }, then σ( ˆXi, cat ) = 2 

and σ( ˆXi, the ) = 1. Similarly, σ(Xi, x i,n ) represents the count of token xi,n in the original (transmitted) sentence Xi;for example, if Xi = {the , cat }, then σ(Xi, cat ) = 1 . The term min  σ( ˆXi, x i,n ), σ (Xi, x i,n ) corresponds to the clipped (matched) count for token xi,n , which restricts the number of matches for that token to its occurrence frequency in the original message. This clipping prevents overcounting repeated tokens that may appear multiple times in the decoded output but fewer times in the source sentence, thereby ensuring that only legitimate token matches are counted in the accuracy computation. This metric evaluates whether the transmitted semantics introduce incorrect or hallucinated (information that the transmitter never sent) tokens. Unlike BLEU, it is order-independent and reflects token-level correctness. Thus, BLEU ̸ = semantic accuracy: BLEU penalizes word-order and phrase mismatch, whereas semantic accuracy only measures correctness of recovered semantic elements. 

4) Semantic Completeness (Token-Level Recall): Semantic completeness as shown in (11), measures how much of the original message’s content is present in the decoded sentence, i.e., 

Comp i =

P 

> xi,n ∈V

min( σ( ˆXi, x i,n ), σ (Xi, x i,n )) 

P 

> xi,n ∈V

σ(Xi, x i,n ) (11) Using the same clipped token matching defined above, the numerator P 

> xi,n ∈V

min  σ( ˆXi, x i,n ), σ (Xi, x i,n ) represents the total number of correctly recovered tokens, and the de-nominator P 

> xi,n ∈V

σ(Xi, x i,n ) denotes the total number of tokens present in the original message Xi. Hence, Comp i

quantifies the fraction of original semantic content that has been successfully reconstructed at the receiver, serving as a measure of semantic recall or completeness. A higher value of Comp i indicates that the system has retained more of the transmitted meaning, whereas a lower value signifies seman-tic loss due to bandwidth compression, channel distortion, or cGAN reconstruction limitations. Semantic completeness therefore quantifies the information preservation achieved by semantic resource allocation. These four metrics collectively capture the behavior of the proposed SA–cGAN model in managing the trade-off between distortion criticality and information representability. 

B. Problem Formulation 

Considering semantic transmission efficiency, we aim to design an optimization problem that selects which semantics to encode and transmit, under the trade-off between: (a) information representability loss (LIR ), that measures how well a few selected semantics can represent the full meaning of the original sentence, and (b) distortion criticality loss (LDC ),that measures how vulnerable the selected semantics is to distortion due to channel and symbolic ambiguity, especially under fading channel and imperfect cGAN reconstruction. Let X = {x1, x 2, . . . , x n} denote the input sentence (or source message) composed of n tokens, and let S =

{s1, s 2, . . . , s k} ⊆ X denote the set of semantic tokens (i.e., semantics) selected from X based on the semantic importance scores αi using the self-attention mechanism. The semantic importance scores αi are computed via a self-attention mech-anism over token embeddings {ui}ni=1 , where the learnable parameters assign higher weights to tokens that contribute more significantly to the overall semantic embedding Φ( X).These scores are further refined using KG guided grounding to prioritize tokens corresponding to extracted E and R. We define binary semantic selection variables: si ∈ { 0, 1}, ∀i ∈{1, . . . , |X|} , where si = 1 indicates that token xi is selected in S, provided αi ≥ τα. On the other hand, if αi < τ α, then 

si = 0 (i.e., dropped or compressed). Here, αi denotes the self-attention score/weight and τα is a predefined threshold for importance that can be tuned based on design needs, and 

|X| indicates the total number of semantic units in the input sentence X. We also define Φ( X) as semantic embedding of the original message X which is equal to Pni=1 αiui.

Ψ( S) as an aggregated semantic embedding of the selected subset S which is equal to Pni=1 siui. Where, ui denotes the embedding vector for token xi (or si when selected (i.e., 

Φ( si)). ci : βi

h

Ez∼N (0 ,1) ∥xi −D(G(z|xi)) ∥22 +κ SNR( xi)−1

i

represents the distortion–reliability penalty associated with the transmission of the semantic token xi (provided ∀i : si = 1 

i.e., xi ∈ S), reflecting its semantic reconstruction difficulty and channel unreliability. Here, G(·) and D(·) denote the generator and decoder (discriminator-assisted reconstruction module) of the cGAN used for the generation and reconstruc-tion of semantic symbols, respectively. Specifically, G(z|xi)

represents the semantic symbol generated by the cGAN condi-tioned on the semantic token xi and a latent random vector z,while D(·) reconstructs the semantic representation from the generated symbol. The latent variable z ∼ N (0 , 1) denotes the stochastic input to the generator, allowing the model to learn a distribution of semantic representations conditioned on the input semantic tokens. βi denotes the weight of the 9

token xi in the channel cost. In our framework, cost means the transmission burden and the reliability penalty of sending a semantic unit. It is a semantic physical penalty term that is used to guide optimal token selection. The higher βi indicates that the token xi is more critical for transmission reliably. In addition, k is a bounding parameter associated with the inverse term of the SNR. The higher k indicates that the optimization penalizes the tokens more if they have a low SNR. Following the above discussion, the mathematical formulations of LIR 

and LDC are provided in (12) and (13), respectively. 

LIR = ∥Φ( X) − Ψ( S)∥22 (12) 

LDC =

> n

X

> i=1

βi



Ez∼N (0 ,1) ∥xi − D(G(z|xi)) ∥22

+ κ SNR( xi)−1 (13) Together, LIR and LDC quantify the semantic representabil-ity distortion trade-off that governs optimal token selection. The objective is therefore to identify a subset S ⊆ X that minimizes semantic embedding deviation while controlling semantic reconstruction difficulty and channel unreliability. Building upon these loss components, we now formulate a semantic-adaptive extended optimization problem that explic-itly incorporates practical transmission constraints. Algorithm 1 presents the SA-cGAN enabled 6G SemCom workflow module. 

Algorithm 1 SA-cGAN enabled 6G semantic communication workflow  

> 1:

Input: X = {x1, x 2, . . . , x n} 

> 2:

Output: Decoded sentence ˆX and metrics (BLEU, Sim i,

Acc i, Comp i) 

> 3:

Apply self-attention to obtain importance scores αi 

> 4:

Select subset S ⊆ X based on αi and τα 

> 5:

Refine S using KG relations for semantic consistency  

> 6:

Generate semantic symbols via cGAN generator: G(z|xi),

∀xi ∈ S 

> 7:

Transmit symbols through THz channel with noise and fading  

> 8:

Receive distorted symbols and decode via cGAN decoder 

D(.) 

> 9:

Reconstruct semantics ˆS using KG  

> 10:

Aggregate reconstructed semantics Ψ( ˆS) 

> 11:

Compare ˆS with original X via Φ( X) 

> 12:

Compute BLEU, Sim i, Acc i, and Comp i 

> 13:

if rate failure or semantic loss detected then  

> 14:

Adapt RA and retransmit additional semantic represen-tations  

> 15:

end if  

> 16:

Output ˆX and final performance metrics 

Semantic Adaptive Extended Optimization Problem 

Motivated by the objective of meaning centric communi-cation, we formulate a semantic adaptive optimization prob-lem that explicitly accounts for semantic fidelity, distortion criticality, and information representability . Unlike traditional formulations that optimize raw transmission rates or symbol error metrics, the proposed problem seeks to identify an optimal subset of semantic representations that preserves the intended meaning while efficiently utilizing limited communi-cation resources. Specifically, the formulation jointly balances information representability, distortion criticality, bandwidth occupancy, and channel reliability, thereby capturing the fun-damental trade-offs inherent in SemCom. Based on the study of problem formulation, we present an extended optimization problem, as shown in (14), that rigorously models semantic transmission efficiency under practical constraints. 

min  

> s∈{ 0,1}n

& λ1 ∥Φ( X) − Ψ( S)∥22 + λ2

> n

X

> i=1

cisi (14) s.t. C1 :

> n

X

> i=1

si ≤ kmax , (14a) 

C2 : αi ≥ τα, ∀i : si = 1 , (14b) 

C3 : Ez∼N (0 ,1) 

∥xi − D(G(z|xi)) ∥22

 ≤ ϵ, ∀i : si = 1 ,

(14c) 

C4 : KL (Psrc (xi)∥Pdest (xi)) ≤ δ, ∀i : si = 1 , (14d) 

C5 : Sim( xi, x j ) ≤ τsim , ∀i̸ = j, : si = sj = 1 , (14e) 

C6 : SNR( xi) ≥ γmin , ∀i : si = 1 (14f) where (14a) is a bandwidth constraint that indicates the maximum number of semantics to be transmitted within the bandwidth budget, and (14b) represents a semantic impor-tance threshold constraint that ensures only tokens with self-attention weights above a predefined threshold are selected. The constraint (14c) defines the cGAN reconstruction con-straint, which indicates that the semantic symbols generated from cGAN must be close to the original semantics. Further, (14d) introduces a KG distribution alignment constraint. Here, 

Psrc and Pdest denote probability distributions over the set of semantic R (or semantic triples) derived from the source and reconstructed KG’s, respectively. These distributions rep-resent the relative frequencies of semantic R appearing in the message-level KG. Due to semantic compression, channel distortion, and imperfect cGAN reconstruction, the set of recovered semantic R at the receiver may differ slightly from those extracted at the transmitter. The Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence term therefore measures the discrepancy between the semantic relational structures of the two KG’s. By constraining this divergence below a threshold, the proposed framework ensures that the overall relational semantics of the message remain consistent, even if some tokens are omitted or paraphrased during transmission. This formulation integrates KG aware semantic structure directly into the optimization problem, providing a principled mechanism to preserve se-mantic integrity beyond symbol level reconstruction and con-stituting an additional novelty aligned with the knowledge based SemCom paradigm. Semantic integrity refers to the preservation of the core E–R structure and contextual meaning of the original message after semantic selection, compression, transmission, and reconstruction, regardless of exact lexical or 10 

syntactic variations. The constraint (14e) describes the infor-mation redundancy constraint, where Sim( ., . ) is a semantic similarity metric denotes the cosine similarity between con-textual BERT embeddings that prevents redundant semantic transmission and promotes diversity in selected symbols. The constraint (14f) specifies the transmission reliability, which indicates that each semantic symbol must meet a minimum SNR for reliable transmission. Additionally, the term si is multiplied with the LDC in (14), to count the cost only for symbols that are selected, whereas λ1 and λ2 are weight parameters for LIR and LDC , respectively. IV. S OLUTION FOR OPTIMIZATION PROBLEM 

Given the complexity of the multi-constraint semantic se-lection problem, an exact combinatorial solution is infeasible within practical computational limits. Therefore, a complex-ity analysis is a must to show that the non-deterministic polynomial (NP) hard optimization problem when presented as a heuristic generates approximate results but is computa-tionally tractable. Hence, we construct a systematic solution approach that first relaxes the discrete problem into a convex form and then leverages submodularity to enable efficient approximation. Subsequently, a Lagrangian dual framework is developed to manage constraint interactions, followed by Karush–Kuhn–Tucker (KKT) conditions to characterize opti-mality. The detailed steps are presented below. 

A. Continuous Relaxation 

The original problem involves binary variables (select or not select semantic tokens), making it a combinatorial and non-convex optimization that is NP hard in general. Thus, we are relaxing the binary constraints to allow continuous values (between 0 and 1) which transform the problem into a convex or more tractable form. This enables the use of efficient convex optimization techniques that can find tractable solutions or lower bounds, which is time consuming and complex in the original discrete formulation. Relaxing the binary variables implies that 

0 ≤ si ≤ bi, bi = 1 {αi≥τα} (16) For each subset S, we aggregate: Ψ( S) = Pni=1 siui (linear aggregation): 

min  

> s∈Rn

λ1 Φ( X) − X

> i

siui

> 22

+ λ2

X

> i

cisi (17) s.t. constraints as in (14) hold with si ∈ [0 , b i].The relaxed forms of new constraints are given as: 

Ez

∥xi − D(G(z|xi)) ∥22

 si ≤ ϵ, si ∈ [0 , b i], (18) 

si × SNR( xi) ≥ γmin si, si ∈ [0 , b i] (19) The above relaxation effectively enforces reconstruction and SNR bounds on selected tokens, and sets the foundation for further analytical and algorithmic advances. 

Lemma IV.1 (Convexity verification (relaxed selection)) .

Consider the relaxed problem with 0 ≤ si ≤ bi, where bi =

1{αi ≥ τα}, and linear aggregation Ψ( S) = Pni=1 siui =

U s, with U = [ u1, . . . , u n] ∈ Rd×n, denotes the matrix of embeddings ui.The relaxed optimization problem is given by 

min 

> s∈Rn

ˆF (s) = λ1∥Φ( X) − U s∥22 + λ2

> n

X

> i=1

cisi

s.t. 0 ≤ si ≤ bi, ∀i, 

(20) 

together with the relaxed constraints defined in (14) . If any additional surrogate terms (e.g., convex BLEU surrogates) are convex, then the full relaxed objective with the listed constraints constitutes a convex optimization program. Proof. The quadratic LIR term in (20) expands as ∥Φ −

U s∥22 = ∥Φ∥22 − 2Φ ⊤U s + s⊤(U ⊤U )s, so its Hessian is 

∇2(λ1∥Φ − U s∥22) = 2λ1U ⊤U . Since U ⊤U is positive semidefinite and λ1 ≥ 0, hence this term is convex. Further, the channel-cost term λ2

P 

> i

cisi and the cGAN linearized constraint C3 ≤ ϵ are affine in s and thus convex. Also, the box constraints 0 ≤ si ≤ bi and other budget/linear constraints are convex sets. If additional non-convex evaluation metrics (e.g., BLEU) are incorporated into the optimization, they can be replaced by convex surrogate terms to maintain tractability. That means, any additional surrogate is assumed convex, resulting in a convex contribution. Therefore, the objective in (14) is a sum of convex functions, and the feasible set is an intersection of convex sets, implying that the relaxed problem is a convex program. Moreover, if λ1 > 0 and U ⊤U ≻ 0 on the active columns then the Hessian is positive definite and the objective is strictly convex, yielding a unique minimizer. 

B. Submodularity and Approximability 

The objective function in (14) with its semantic repre-sentation error and additive cost terms, exhibits submodular properties—diminishing returns and modular additive parts. Under mild assumptions on the embedding geometry (e.g., nonnegative pairwise similarities u⊤ 

> i

uj ≥ 0), the resulting set function exhibits the diminishing returns property and is therefore submodular. This structure allows the use of greedy algorithms with theoretical approximation guarantees, specifically a (1 − 1/e ) approximation ratio, which is a strong theoretical guarantee for near-optimality, where e represents the base of the natural logarithm. In other words, exploiting submodularity significantly reduces computational complex-ity and provides provable near-optimality for discrete selec-tion problems under combinatorial constraints like matroids (e.g., semantic diversity) requirements and knapsacks (e.g., bandwidth limit). The bandwidth constraint (14a) imposes a cardinality/knapsack-type restriction on the total number of selected semantic tokens. The diversity constraint (14e), which prevents simultaneous selection of highly similar semantic tokens, induces an independence structure that can be mod-eled as a matroid constraint. The feasible region therefore corresponds to the intersection of a matroid and a knapsack constraint. This property guides the design of practical algo-rithms that are efficient, effective, and ensuring suitability for large scale semantic selection problems in 6G systems. 11 

Lemma IV.2. If Ψ( S) = P 

> i∈S

ui is linear and pairwise similarities satisfy u⊤ 

> i

uj ≥ 0, then the set function 

F (S) = λ1∥Φ( X) − Ψ( S)∥22 + λ2

X

> i∈S

ci (21) 

is submodular. Consequently, maximizing −F (S) under car-dinality, matroid, or knapsack constraints provides a (1 −1/e )

approximation guarantee via greedy or continuous greedy algorithms. Proof. We analyze each component of (14) as, (i) Quadratic semantic representation error: with Ψ( S) = P 

> i∈S

ui, expan-sion gives ∥Φ( X)∥2 − 2Φ( X)⊤ P 

> i∈S

ui + ∥ P 

> i∈S

ui∥2. The corresponding marginal gain for an element j is ∆j (A) = 2Φ( X)⊤uj − 2( P 

> i∈A

ui)⊤uj − ∥ uj ∥2. For S ⊆ T , ∆j (S) −

∆j (T ) = 2( P  

> i∈T\S

ui)⊤uj ≥ 0, proving diminishing re-turns and hence submodularity. (ii) Additive cost: P 

> i∈S

ci is modular (linear in si), which preserves submodularity under addition, which means that the contribution of each semantic token is independent of the selection of other tokens. (iii) Combining terms: Since the sum of a submodular function and a modular function remains submodular, the overall ob-jective F (S) is therefore submodular. Its negation −F (S) is monotone submodular under nonnegative weights, and under a cardinality or matroid/knapsack constraint, [44] guarantees a (1 − 1/e ) approximation via greedy or continuous greedy algorithms. Here, the knapsack constraint captures the finite semantic transmission budget, while the matroid structure arises from semantic diversity and dependency constraints that restrict the joint selection of highly similar semantic tokens, ensuring coverage and redundancy control. 

Lemma IV.3 (Matroid intersection lemma (feasible augmen-tation under matroid intersection)) . Let M1 = ( E, I1) and 

M2 = (E, I2) be two matroids on the same ground set 

E = {1, . . . , n }. If A ⊆ E is independent in both matroids (A ∈ I 1 ∩ I 2) and B ∈ I 1 with |B| > |A|, then there exists 

b ∈ B \A such that A∪{ b} ∈ I 1 ∩I 2 or there exists a ∈ A\B

with B ∪ { a} ∈ I 1 ∩ I 2.Proof. This is a standard augmentation property consequence of the matroid exchange axiom applied to intersection struc-tures as detailed by the Edmonds’ matroid intersection theorem [45]. An exchange is first applied on M1, followed by a repair step on M2 using alternating augmenting paths in the auxiliary exchange graph. This matroid intersection lemma guarantees that, in formulated semantic selection problem, it is always possible to safely add or swap semantic tokens while respecting both diversity (14e) constraints and semantic struc-ture (14d) constraints, ensuring that greedy or augmentation algorithms progress correctly toward a near-optimal semantic subset. In the proposed formulation, the ground set E corresponds to candidate semantic tokens, while M1 models diversity constraints (14e) that prevent redundant semantic selection, and M2 models structural or KG-based semantic integrity constraints (14d). This lemma guarantees that if a larger feasible semantic subset exists, then it is always possible to augment or exchange elements while maintaining feasibility under both constraints. This property ensures that greedy or augmentation-based algorithms can iteratively improve the se-mantic subset without being stuck in infeasible configurations. Consequently, the matroid intersection structure provides a theoretical foundation for the correctness and convergence of the proposed constrained semantic selection strategy. 

Algorithm 2 Greedy semantic selection with multi-constraints  

> 1:

Word and token extraction: Given input sentence X =

{x1, x 2, . . . , x n}, decompose into tokens with embeddings 

ui and importance scores αi 

> 2:

Semantic embedding setup: Compute full semantic em-bedding Φ( X), and define the aggregated embedding for any selected subset S as Ψ( S) = P 

> i∈S

ui 

> 3:

Binary variables: Associate each token xi with a binary selection variable si ∈ { 0, 1}, where si = 1 if xi is selected  

> 4:

Information representability loss (LIR ): Compute the 

(LIR )

LIR = ∥Φ( X) − Ψ( S)∥22

if the information representability is low, LIR is high  

> 5:

Distortion criticality Loss (LDC ): Compute the (LDC )

LDC =

> n

X

> i=1

h

βi

h

Ez ∥xi −D(G(z|xi)) ∥22 +κ SNR( xi)−1ii 

lower is better.  

> 6:

Candidate filtering: Define the candidate set 

C ← 



i

αi ≥ τα,

Ez

∥xi − D(G(z|xi)) ∥22

 ≤ ϵ, 

SNR( xi) ≥ γmin ,KL i ≤ δ

 

> 7:

Initialize selected set S ← ∅  

> 8:

while |S| < k max and C̸ = ∅ do  

> 9:

for each i ∈ C do  

> 10:

Check diversity constraint: ensure Sim( xi, x j ) ≤

τsim for all j ∈ S; if violated, mark i as infeasible and skip  

> 11:

Compute marginal gain: 

∆i =λ1



∥Φ( X) − Ψ( S)∥22

− ∥ Φ( X) − Ψ( S ∪ { i})∥22



− λ2ci 

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

Select i∗ = arg max i∈C ∆i among feasible candidates. The greedy step maximizes ∆i, which represents the net weighted reduction in the (LIR ) obtained by adding token xi, penalized by ci. 

> 14:

Update S ← S ∪ { i∗} and C ← C \ { i∗} 

> 15:

end while  

> 16:

return S

Theorem IV.1 (Greedy guarantee with matroid + knapsack constraints) . Suppose g(S) is nonnegative monotone submodu-12 

lar and let the feasible family be F = I ∩{ S : P 

> i

wisi ≤ W }

where I is a matroid family and wi ≥ 0. Then the continuous greedy + swap rounding scheme yields a (1 − 1/e − ε)

approximation to max S∈F g(S) for any ε > 0, in polynomial time (polynomial in n and 1/ε ). Proof. The continuous greedy algorithm of Vondr´ ak [46] constructs a fractional solution x for the multilinear extension of g that achieves a (1 − 1/e ) approximation factor. The swap rounding scheme of [47] then converts x into an integral solution S ∈ F while preserving the feasibility under the constraints of the matroid and the knapsack while incurring only a small loss, ε, which arises from discretization. Hence, the overall approximation factor is (1 − 1/e − ε) following the classical analyses in the submodular optimization literature [44]. This theorem guarantees that a hard combinatorial semantic-selection problem with matroid constraints (semantic struc-ture, diversity) and knapsack constraints (bandwidth) can be solved efficiently, achieving at least 63% of the optimal value via continuous greedy and swap rounding—the best possible polynomial-time guarantee for submodular objectives. In our case, the feasible set is the intersection of matroid constraints (C4 and C5) with a knapsack constraint ( C1). This exactly matches the theoretical framework that allows a (1 − 1/e − ε)

approximation using continuous greedy and swap rounding. The algorithm 2 is the classical greedy algorithm for sub-modular minimization/maximization, and it has been proven earlier that our function is submodular. At every step, the algorithm selects the token whose addition reduces semantic distortion the most, while accounting for its transmission cost. 

Algorithm 3 Lagrangian dual ascent for relaxed semantic selection problem  

> 1:

Initialize multipliers λ, μ i, ν ij , η i, θ i ← 0 

> 2:

while not converged do  

> 3:

Solve convex quadratic program (QP) for s given cur-rent multipliers  

> 4:

Update dual variables:  

> 5:

λ ← [λ + η(P 

> i

si − kmax )] + 

> 6:

μi ← [μi + η(KL i − δ)] +, ∀i 

> 7:

νij ← [νij + η(si + sj − (1 + τ ′ 

> ij

))] +, ∀i < j  

> 8:

ηi ← [ηi + η(Ez

∥xi − D(G(z|xi)) ∥22

 si − ϵ)] +, ∀i 

> 9:

θi ← [θi + η (si(γmin − SNR( xi)))] + , ∀i 

> 10:

end while  

> 11:

Threshold/round s to obtain discrete set S

C. Lagrangian Dual Formulation 

Many constraints in (14) are complex and coupled, mak-ing direct constrained optimization difficult. Formulating the Lagrangian dual problem converts constrained optimization into an unconstrained dual maximization problem involving Lagrange multipliers [48]. This enables iterative dual ascent methods, where primal variables and multipliers are updated alternately, simplifying constraint handling. The Lagrangian for the relaxed problem as expressed in (17), including SNR and other constraints, is shown in (22) 

L(s, λ, μ, ν, η, θ ) = λ1 Φ( X) −

> n

X

> i=1

siui

> 22

+ λ2

> n

X

> i=1

cisi

+ λ

> n

X

> i=1

si − kmax 

!

+

> n

X

> i=1

μiKL i −

> n

X

> i=1

μiδ

+ X

> i<j

νij (si + sj − 1 − τ ′ 

> ij

)+

> n

X

> i=1

ηi



Ez [∥xi − D(G(z|xi)) ∥22] − ϵ



si +

> n

X

> i=1

θi(γmin − SNR( xi)) si

(22) where, Lagrange multipliers λ, μ i, ν ij , η i, θ i ≥ 0 for respective constraints. We update them iteratively using constraint viola-tions (dual ascent/subgradient), and at convergence, their val-ues signify the constraints which are active and how strongly they influence the optimal semantic selection. Having constructed the Lagrangian, the next step is to characterize how the primal variables and the Lagrange multi-pliers interact. Specifically, for any fixed set of multipliers, the Lagrangian evaluates the primal objective together with linear penalties for constraint violations. To understand how these penalties shape the feasible region and influence the optimal semantic selection, we introduce the dual function , obtained by minimizing the Lagrangian over the primal variables. The dual function captures the lower bound on the primal objective attainable for a given choice of multipliers, and forms the basis for the dual maximization problem [48]. 

Dual Function: The dual function is defined as 

g(λ, μ, ν, η, θ ) = min 

> 0≤si≤bi

L(s, λ, μ, ν, η, θ ) (23) which provides the lower bound of the primal objective for fixed dual variables. Thus, g measures how well the multipliers penalize constraint violations. The dual function defined in (23) is concave in its argu-ments, regardless of whether the primal problem is convex [48]. This property enables the use of efficient dual ascent or subgradient methods to iteratively update the Lagrange multipliers associated with multi-constraints. As a result, the proposed framework can handle complex coupled constraints while maintaining computational tractability and convergence guarantees at the dual level. 

Dual Problem: It is known that, the dual function computes the lower bound on the primal objective for lagrange multi-pliers. Because the dual function is a lower bound, the dual problem seeks the best such bound by maximizing g. The dual problem is then given as 

max 

> λ,μ,ν, η,θ ≥0

g(λ, μ, ν, η, θ ) (24) 13 

which seeks the tightest (largest) lower bound of the primal objective. The inner minimization over the primal optimization variable s and the outer maximization over the multipliers thus naturally arise from lagrangian duality theory. Thus, even though the primal problem is a minimization, the correspond-ing Lagrangian dual problem is a maximization problem. The algorithm 3 outlines the Lagrangian dual ascent approach for the relaxed semantic selection problem. 

Weak and Strong Duality: For the relaxed semantic selec-tion problem expressed in (17), the primal objective is convex in s and all constraints are affine after relaxation. Therefore, the problem constitutes a convex program. From the standard convex duality theory [48], weak duality always holds, which implies that the dual function provides a lower bound on the optimal primal objective value. Furthermore, if Slater’s condition [48], is satisfied (i.e., there exists a strictly feasible 

s satisfying all inequality constraints with strict inequality), then strong duality holds and the duality gap is zero. In this case, the optimal primal value equals the optimal dual value, and the primal–dual optimal pair satisfies the KKT conditions. Strong duality ensures that solving the dual maximization problem is equivalent to solving the relaxed primal seman-tic selection problem. Consequently, the optimal Lagrange multipliers quantify the sensitivity of the optimal objective to bandwidth, semantic consistency, information redundancy, cGAN reconstruction, and SNR constraints. This provides both computational tractability and interpretability. Specifically, the multipliers indicate which physical or semantic constraints are active and how strongly they influence optimal semantic resource allocation. We leverage duality to interpret seman-tic–physical trade-offs and to design tractable algorithms. 

D. KKT Conditions 

The KKT conditions provide the fundamental optimality characterization for the relaxed semantic selection problem shown in (20). For convex problems satisfying the Slater’s condition, these conditions are necessary and sufficient for optimality. It characterizes stationary points where primal feasibility, dual feasibility, and complementary slackness hold simultaneously. Verifying or enforcing the KKT conditions helps to ensure that the obtained solution is optimal or close to optimal. Let 

r = Φ( X) −

> n

X

> i=1

siui, (25) which denotes the semantic representation residual. Differen-tiating the Lagrangian with respect to each selection variable 

si, gives the stationarity condition as shown below 

∇si L = − 2λ1 u⊤ 

> i

r + λ2ci + λ + X 

> j̸=i

νij 

+ ηi

 Ez

∥xi − D(G(z|xi)) ∥22

 − ϵ

+ θi (γmin − SNR( xi)) = 0 .

(26) The remaining KKT conditions consist of: (i) Primal feasibil-ity: all relaxed constraints (bandwidth, semantic consistency, information redundancy, cGAN reconstruction, and SNR reli-ability) must be satisfied by s. (ii) Dual feasibility: multipliers 

λ, μ i, ν ij , η i, θ i ≥ 0. (iii) Complementary slackness: each multiplier must vanish unless its associated constraint is active. Together, these conditions characterize any optimal solution of the relaxed problem and guide the design of iterative primal–dual update methods in the semantic transmission framework. Algorithm 4 presents the primal–dual optimization framework based on KKT conditions. 

Algorithm 4 Primal–dual optimization with KKT conditions 

Require: Embeddings U , target vector Φ, costs ci, bandwidth budget kmax , SNR threshold γmin , tolerances εKKT , ε cons ,step size η > 0 

> 1:

Initialize s(0) feasible; multipliers (λ, μ i, ν ij , η i, θ i) ← 0 

> 2:

for t = 0 , 1, . . . , T max do  

> 3:

Compute residual r(t) = Φ − U s (t) 

> 4:

Primal update: 

s(t+1) = arg min   

> 0≤si≤bi,Psi≤kmax

L(s, λ, μ, ν, η, θ )

using a projected gradient or QP solver.  

> 5:

Update residual r(t+1) = Φ − U s (t+1)  

> 6:

Compute constraint violations: 

C1 = X

> i

si − kmax 

C4,i = KL i − δC5,ij = si + sj − (1 + τ ′ 

> ij

)

C3,i = ( Ei − ϵ)si

C6,i = si(γmin − SNR( xi))  

> 7:

Stationarity check: for each i, evaluate 

∇si L = − 2λ1u⊤ 

> i

r(t+1) + λ2ci + λ + X 

> j̸=i

νij 

+ ηi(Ei − ϵ) + θi(γmin − SNR( xi))  

> 8:

Dual ascent: 

λ ← [λ + η C 1]+

μi ← [μi + η C 4,i ]+

νij ← [νij + η C 5,ij ]+

ηi ← [ηi + η C 3,i ]+

θi ← [θi + η C 6,i ]+ 

> 9:

if max i |∇ si L| ≤ εKKT and all constraint violations, 

C ≤ εcons then  

> 10:

stop  

> 11:

end if  

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

Rounding: convert relaxed s to binary by thresholding or top-k, , then repair to satisfy bandwidth budget and diversity.  

> 14:

Return feasible solution S = {i : si = 1 }

Overall, the methodological steps detailed in this section convert the discrete combinatorial optimization problem into a continuous tractable framework, leverage the submodular structure for efficient approximation and efficient algorithms, 14 

incorporate complex constraints via Lagrangian duality, and establish rigorous optimality conditions. Together, they pro-vide a theoretical and practical framework for obtaining better quality, provably near optimal solutions to the SemCom opti-mization problem. V. S IMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 

This section presents a detailed analysis of the performance evaluation for the proposed SA–cGAN model. The text dataset used in our work consisted of sentences ranging from 5 to 30 words, with a vocabulary size of 6,267. The performance of the proposed framework is evaluated across multiple channel conditions and compared with Huffman+Turbo [10], joint source–channel coding (JSCC) [9], and a fixed-length (5-bit) + Reed Solomon (RS), Huffman+RS, 5-bit + Turbo [19] coding baselines. Fig. 4 illustrates the BLEU performance of different communication schemes as a function of SNR. At low SNR regimes (0–5 dB), the proposed SA–cGAN achieves BLEU scores in the range of ≈ 0.01 –0.03 , which are comparable to Huffman + Turbo ( ≈ 0.02 –0.03 ), 5 Bit + RS ( ≈ 0.02 –0.04 ), and 5 Bit + Turbo ( ≈ 0.01 –0.03 ), but significantly lower than JSCC, which maintains a relatively stable BLEU score of ≈ 0.42 − 0.46 in this region. At moderate SNR values (7.5–10 dB), SA–cGAN shows a gradual increase in BLEU from ≈ 0.04 to ≈ 0.1, closely following the performance of traditional source–channel coding schemes, while JSCC remains nearly constant at ≈ 0.46 –0.47 . As the SNR exceeds 12.5 dB, the semantic advantage of SA–cGAN becomes more pronounced. At 15 dB, SA–cGAN achieves a BLEU score of 

≈ 0.43 , outperforming Huffman + Turbo ( ≈ 0.26 ), 5 Bit + Turbo ( ≈ 0.16 ), 5 Bit + RS ( ≈ 0.31 ) and Huffman + RS (≈ 0.36 ). In the high SNR regime (17.5–20 dB), SA–cGAN shows a significant improvement, reaching BLEU scores of 

≈ 0.61 at 17.5 dB and ≈ 0.72 at 20 dB, thus surpassing Huffman + Turbo ( ≈ 0.43 –0.53 ), 5 Bit + RS ( ≈ 0.46 –0.55 ), Huffman + RS ( ≈ 0.49 –0.60 ), and JSCC ( ≈ 0.46 –0.47 ). These results highlight that BLEU, which measures structural n-gram similarity, is not the primary strength of SA–cGAN, as the system prioritizes semantic meaning preservation rather than exact syntactic reconstruction. Fig. 5 shows that both semantic accuracy (token-level pre-cision) and semantic completeness (token-level recall) follow a smooth and monotonic trend with increasing SNR. At 0 dB, the system achieves a semantic accuracy of ≈ 0.19 and a semantic completeness of ≈ 0.18 , indicating that even under severe noise conditions, the core semantic elements remain partially recoverable. As SNR increases, both semantic accuracy and semantic completeness improve monotonically, reaching high values at larger SNR levels, which confirms improved semantic reconstruction under reliable channel con-ditions. The tight coupling of the two curves confirms that the proposed SA–cGAN model effectively balances token-level precision (semantic accuracy) and token-level recall (se-mantic completeness). This behavior reflects the effectiveness of the self-attention-based semantic extractor in prioritizing semantically important tokens and the role of KG-aligned representations in preserving contextual relationships across varying channel conditions and cGAN reconstruction con-straint. Notably, the absence of large gaps between semantic   

> Fig. 4. BLEU score comparison of the proposed SA-cGAN model with existing approaches
> Fig. 5. Semantic accuracy and semantic completeness versus SNR of the proposed SA–cGAN model

accuracy and semantic completeness curve indicates minimal semantic hallucination and limited loss of essential informa-tion, even when aggressive semantic compression is applied. Compared to BLEU, these metrics demonstrate that SA– cGAN preserves meaning more reliably than surface linguistic structure, aligning precisely with the goals of SemCom. Fig. 6 illustrates the semantic similarity performance as a function of SNR using contextual BERT embeddings. Unlike BLEU, the semantic similarity metric captures the meaning, synonyms, and contextual semantic alignment. The results show that semantic similarity increases with SNR in all methods, re-flecting improved semantic reconstruction under better channel conditions. In the low SNR regime, SA–cGAN significantly outperforms traditional coding schemes, which exhibit near-complete semantic degradation, while JSCC achieves mod-erate performance. As SNR increases, SA–cGAN continues to improve steadily due to its adaptive semantic representa-tion mechanism, eventually surpassing baseline methods and achieving near-perfect semantic preservation at high SNR. Un-like conventional approaches, which focus on symbol recovery, the proposed method enables robust and adaptive meaning preservation, demonstrating its suitability for SemCom in 6G systems. Although JSCC achieves higher semantic similarity 15  

> Fig. 6. Semantic similarity comparison of the proposed SA-cGAN model with existing approaches

in certain SNR regimes, it operates by transmitting dense representations without explicit semantic selection. In contrast, the proposed SA–cGAN framework performs adaptive seman-tic compression by selecting and transmitting only the most informative semantic components based on information rep-resentability and semantic reliability. This enables significant reductions in bandwidth usage while preserving core semantic content. Furthermore, SA–cGAN provides an interpretable and controllable mechanism to balance semantic fidelity and transmission cost, which is not achievable in conventional JSCC approaches. Therefore, the value of the proposed method lies not only in the performance of semantic similarity but also in its ability to achieve efficient, adaptive, and meaning-aware communication under resource constraints. On the other hand, Fig. 7 illustrates the self-attention behav-ior of the proposed SA-cGAN model. The heatmap aggregates token wise importance scores for the 500 sentences (rows) and 20 token positions (columns), where bright yellow cells cor-respond to high attention scores, and dark cells correspond to tokens that are either padded or deemed semantically unimpor-tant. Across the corpus, the model consistently assigns higher attention to a sparse subset of tokens in each sentence, while suppressing the padded tail region and many low information tokens, confirming that the learned selector performs effective semantic compression rather than uniformly weighting all positions. Another important observation is that high attention regions are spread over different positions and sentences in-stead of being confined to the first few tokens, which indicates that the self-attention and sentence-wise normalization steps have removed the positional bias and drive the selection based on contextual importance. This behavior matches the design objective of SA-cGAN, the encoder automatically concentrates transmission resources on content words, entities, and key relations that are critical for reconstructing the meaning at the receiver, while allowing redundant or less informative words to be down weighted, when bandwidth is limited. Fig. 8 shows the distribution of semantic compression ratios achieved by the SA-cGAN model across the evaluated corpus, where  

> Fig. 7. Semantic token importance heatmap for SA-cGAN

the ratio denotes the fraction of selected tokens relative to the total number of tokens in each sentence. The histogram shows that a large portion of sentences exhibit high selection ratios, with ≈ 400–450 sentences retaining more than 80% of tokens (selection ratio > 0.8). This behavior corresponds to a conservative semantic adaptation regime, where distortion crit-icality is high and therefore require preserving most semantic elements to maintain semantic fidelity. A substantial number of sentences ≈ 300–350 samples fall within the moderate compression ratio range of 0.6–0.8 (i.e., 20%–40% compres-sion), indicating balanced semantic adaptation. In this regime, the model successfully removes redundant or low importance tokens while retaining core semantics, achieving meaningful bandwidth savings without compromising semantic integrity. Around ≈ 150–300 sentences exhibit compression ratios in the 0.4–0.6 (i.e., 40%–60% compression) range, reflecting more aggressive pruning enabled by higher information rep-resentability and lower distortion criticality. Only a small fraction of sentences, fewer than ≈ 60–70 samples experience highly aggressive compression with selection ratios below 0.4 (i.e., > 60% compression), demonstrating that the proposed model rarely discards semantics excessively. This distribution confirms the model’s capability for adaptive bandwidth al-location, longer sentences containing redundant tokens with high information representability are compressed more aggres-sively, achieving reductions of up to 40–60%, whereas shorter sentences with high distortion criticality preserve nearly all tokens to ensure semantic fidelity. In general, the histogram 16  

> Fig. 8. SA-cGAN semantic compression ratio distribution

validates the proposed framework’s ability to dynamically trade-off bandwidth efficiency and semantic fidelity based on information representability and distortion criticality. Furthermore, Fig. 9 presents an SNR dependent analysis of the four key components of the SA-cGAN SemCom pipeline. At low SNR (0 dB), semantic selection exhibits the highest effectiveness ( ≈ 1.0), highlighting its critical role in priori-tizing essential tokens when channel reliability is poor. The KG effectiveness also peaks in this regime, indicating that the knowledge graph is particularly valuable when received semantics are noisy or incomplete, as it compensates for semantic degradation through relational inference. As SNR improves from 6 dB to 12 dB, channel capacity and reconstruc-tion quality also improve, increasing from roughly 0.2 to 0.5, while the effectiveness of semantic selection decreases (from 

≈ 0.9 to 0.6), and the effectiveness of KG gradually declines. This trend reflects a reduced need for aggressive semantic pruning and repair under cleaner channel conditions. At high SNR (20 dB), the channel capacity and reconstruction quality dominate ( ≈ 1.0), while the contributions of semantic selection and KG decrease to very low values. This behavior confirms that the relative importance of the knowledge graph decreases as the reliability of the channel improves, demonstrating the adaptive resource allocation of the system in different SNR regimes. Finally, Fig. 10 demonstrates the convergence be-havior of the loss function for the proposed SA-cGAN model. The loss decreases rapidly in the initial iterations, indicating efficient learning of coarse semantic representations, followed by a gradual stabilization phase reflecting fine-grained refine-ment. The smooth and stable convergence without divergence demonstrates the effectiveness of the training process. This behavior confirms the robustness of the proposed model for reliable SemCom under practical channel conditions. Overall, these comprehensive results establish that while SA–cGAN may not always maximize syntactic BLEU metrics, particularly at low SNR, it significantly outperforms existing schemes in semantic oriented metrics, including semantic similarity, semantic accuracy, and semantic completeness. This aligns with the intended design philosophy of SemCom, where preserving meaning under resource and channel constraints is more critical than reconstructing exact symbol sequences. The observed improvements demonstrate the effectiveness of the   

> Fig. 9. SNR dependent SA-cGAN component effectiveness
> Fig. 10. Training loss behavior of the proposed SA–cGAN model over 500 iterations

proposed self-attention extractor, KG-driven semantic repre-sentation, and cGAN-powered adaptive transmission strategy in achieving robust, resource-efficient SemCom over noisy channels. VI. C ONCLUSION 

In this work, we proposed an SA–cGAN framework for SemCom that explicitly balances the trade-off between dis-tortion criticality and information representability under vary-ing channel conditions. Unlike conventional symbol-centric systems, the proposed approach adaptively selects and trans-mits semantic representations according to their contextual importance and vulnerability to channel distortion, enabling efficient utilization of bandwidth. The results show that al-though SA–cGAN achieves a lower syntactic fidelity (BLEU) performance in low-SNR regimes, it significantly outperforms both traditional and JSCC-based schemes at high SNR. The proposed model consistently achieves high semantic simi-larity across varying channel conditions, along with pro-gressive improvements in semantic accuracy and semantic completeness metric. These results confirm that SA–cGAN effectively preserves semantic content under severe noise by prioritizing distortion critical semantics in conservative 17 

regimes and exploiting higher information representability in favorable channel conditions. Furthermore, the semantic compression analysis reveals adaptive bandwidth allocation behavior, where sentences with high distortion criticality retain most tokens, while highly representable sentences undergo aggressive semantic compression without loss of meaning. The stable convergence of the training loss validates the robustness of the adversarial learning process and the effectiveness of the integrated self-attention and knowledge-graph guidance. Overall, SA-cGAN integrated KG assisted semantic extrac-tion and SNR aware adaptive transmission, enables robust and resource efficient communication that aligns with 6G goals, demonstrating clear advantages over existing symbol-centric schemes and highlighting the transformative potential of semantic aware transmission strategies. Future work will focus on extending the proposed SA–cGAN framework to multi-user and multi-modal SemCom scenarios, including joint processing of textual, visual, and sensor data. Moreover, inves-tigating online adaptive semantic encoding and reinforcement learning based resource allocation under dynamically varying channel conditions represents a promising direction for further enhancing system robustness and efficiency. REFERENCES [1] Y. Shao, Q. Cao, and D. Gunduz, “A Theory of Semantic Communi-cation,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing , vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 12 211–12 228, 2024. [2] D. Wheeler and B. Natarajan, “Engineering Semantic Communication: A Survey,” IEEE Access , vol. 11, pp. 13965–13995, 2023. [3] Q. Lan, D. Wen, Z. Zhang, Q. Zeng, X. Chen, P. Popovski, and K. Huang, “What is Semantic Communication? A View on Conveying Meaning in the Era of Machine Intelligence,” Journal of Communica-tions and Information Networks , vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 336–371, 2021. [4] C. E. Shannon, “A Mathematical Theory of Communication,” Bell System Technical Journal , vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 379–423, 1948. [5] D. Tse and P. Viswanath, Fundamentals of Wireless Communication .Cambridge University Press, 2005. [6] E. C. Strinati and S. Barbarossa, “6G Networks: Beyond Shannon Towards Semantic and Goal-Oriented Communications,” Computer Net-works , vol. 190, p. 107930, 2021. [7] S. R. Pokhrel and J. Choi, “Understand-Before-Talk (UBT): A Semantic Communication Approach to 6G Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology , vol. 72, no. 3, pp. 3544–3556, 2023. [8] J. Bao, P. Basu, M. Dean, C. Partridge, A. Swami, W. Leland, and J. A. Hendler, “Towards a Theory of Semantic Communication,” in 2011 IEEE Network Science Workshop , 2011, pp. 110–117. [9] N. Farsad, M. Rao, and A. Goldsmith, “Deep Learning for Joint Source-Channel Coding of Text,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , 2018, pp. 2326– 2330. [10] Z. Qin, X. Tao, J. Lu, W. Tong, and G. Y. Li, “Semantic Communi-cations: Principles and Challenges,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine ,vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 35–47, 2022. [11] X. Luo, H. H. Chen, and Q. Guo, “Semantic Communications: Overview, Open Issues, and Future Research Directions,” IEEE Wireless Commu-nications , vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 210–219, 2022. [12] L. Wang, W. Wu, F. Zhou, Z. Yang, Z. Qin, and Q. Wu, “Adaptive Resource Allocation for Semantic Communication Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Communications , vol. 72, no. 11, pp. 6900–6916, 2024. [13] L. Yan, Z. Qin, R. Zhang, Y. Li, and G. Y. Li, “Resource Allocation for Text Semantic Communications,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters , vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 1394–1398, 2022. [14] J. Mao, K. Xiong, M. Liu, Z. Qin, W. Chen, P. Fan, and K. B. Letaief, “A GAN-Based Semantic Communication for Text Without CSI,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications , vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 14 498– 14 514, 2024. [15] J. Ying, Z. Qin, Y. Feng, L. Wang, and X. Tao, “Joint Semantic-Channel Coding and Modulation for Token Communications,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications , vol. 25, pp. 8179–8193, 2026. [16] L. N. DeLong, R. F. Mir, and J. D. Fleuriot, “Neurosymbolic AI for Reasoning Over Knowledge Graphs: A Survey,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , pp. 1–21, 2024. [17] C. K. Thomas and W. Saad, “Neuro-Symbolic Artificial Intelligence (AI) for Intent based Semantic Communication,” GLOBECOM 2022 - 2022 IEEE Global Communications Conference , pp. 2698–2703, 2022. [18] Y. Wang, M. Chen, T. Luo, W. Saad, D. Niyato, H. V. Poor, and S. Cui, “Performance Optimization for Semantic Communications: An Attention-Based Reinforcement Learning Approach,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications , vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 2598–2613, 2022. [19] H. Xie, Z. Qin, G. Y. Li, and B.-H. Juang, “Deep Learning Enabled Semantic Communication Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Pro-cessing , vol. 69, pp. 2663–2675, 2021. [20] W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. Chen, “A Vision of 6G Wireless Systems: Applications, Trends, Technologies, and Open Research Problems,” 

IEEE Network , vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 134–142, 2020. [21] Z. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Z. Ma, M. Xiao, Z. Ding, X. Lei, G. K. Karagiannidis, and P. Fan, “6G Wireless Networks: Vision, Requirements, Architecture, and Key Technologies,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine , vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 28–41, 2019. [22] S. Gao, X. Qin, L. Chen, Y. Chen, K. Han, and P. Zhang, “Importance of Semantic Information Based on Semantic Value,” IEEE Transactions on Communications , vol. 72, no. 9, pp. 5443–5457, 2024. [23] S. Iyer, R. Khanai, D. Torse et al. , “A Survey on Semantic Communi-cations for Intelligent Wireless Networks,” Wireless Personal Commu-nications , vol. 129, pp. 569–611, 2023. [24] L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The Internet of Things: A Survey,” 

Computer Networks , vol. 54, no. 15, pp. 2787–2805, 2010. [25] H. Hu, X. Zhu, F. Zhou, W. Wu, R. Q. Hu, and H. Zhu, “One-to-Many Semantic Communication Systems: Design, Implementation, Performance Evaluation,” IEEE Communications Letters , vol. 26, no. 12, pp. 2959–2963, 2022. [26] R. Fantacci and B. Picano, “Multi-User Semantic Communications System with Spectrum Scarcity,” Journal of Communications and In-formation Networks , vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 375–382, 2022. [27] D. G¨ und¨ uz, Z. Qin, I. E. Aguerri, H. S. Dhillon, Z. Yang, A. Yener, K. K. Wong, and C.-B. Chae, “Beyond Transmitting Bits: Context, Semantics, and Task-Oriented Communications,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications , vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 5–41, 2023. [28] D. Wheeler, E. E. Tripp, and B. Natarajan, “Semantic Communication With Conceptual Spaces,” IEEE Communications Letters , vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 532–535, 2023. [29] M. U. Lokumarambage, V. S. S. Gowrisetty, H. Rezaei, T. Sivalingam, N. Rajatheva, and A. Fernando, “Wireless End-to-End Image Transmis-sion System Using Semantic Communications,” IEEE Access , vol. 11, pp. 37 149–37 163, 2023. [30] H. Ye, L. Liang, G. Y. Li, and B.-H. Juang, “Deep Learning-Based End-to-End Wireless Communication Systems With Conditional GANs as Unknown Channels,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications ,vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 3133–3143, 2020. [31] E. Bourtsoulatze, D. B. Kurka, and D. G¨ und¨ uz, “Deep Joint Source-Channel Coding for Wireless Image Transmission,” in ICASSP 2019 -2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , 2019, pp. 4774–4778. [32] W. Xie, M. Xiong, Z. Yang, W. Liu, L. Fan, and J. Zou, “Real and Fake Channel: GAN-based Wireless Channel Modeling and Generating,” 

Physical Communication , vol. 61, p. 102214, 2023. [33] X. Xu, H. Xiong, Y. Wang et al. , “Knowledge-Enhanced Semantic Communication System with OFDM Transmissions,” Science China Information Sciences , vol. 66, p. 172302, 2023. [34] S. Guo, Y. Wang, J. Ye, A. Zhang, P. Zhang, and K. Xu, “Semantic Importance-Aware Communications With Semantic Correction Using Large Language Models,” IEEE Transactions on Machine Learning in Communications and Networking , vol. 3, pp. 232–245, 2025. [35] S. Ji, S. Pan, E. Cambria, P. Marttinen, and P. S. Yu, “A Survey on Knowledge Graphs: Representation, Acquisition, and Applications,” 

IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 494–514, 2022. [36] Y. Luan, L. He, M. Ostendorf, and H. Hajishirzi, “Multi-Task Identifi-cation of Entities, Relations, and Coreference for Scientific Knowledge Graph Construction,” in Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empir-ical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 2018, pp. 3219–3232. [37] Y. Lin, S. Shen, Z. Liu, H. Luan, and M. Sun, “Neural Relation Extraction with Selective Attention over Instances,” in Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2016, pp. 2124–2133. 18 

[38] S. Badreddine, A. d’Avila Garcez, L. Serafini, and M. Spranger, “Logic Tensor Networks,” Artificial Intelligence , vol. 303, pp. 103649, 2022. [39] F. Shafi, A. Waghmare, R. J. Pandya, and S. Iyer, “Neuro-Symbolic AI: Pioneering Semantic Communication for 6G Wireless Networks,” in 2025 International Conference on Microwave, Optical, and Commu-nication Engineering (ICMOCE) , 2025, pp. 1–5. [40] A. Goldsmith, “Wireless Communications” . Cambridge University Press, 2005. [41] J. G. Proakis and M. Salehi, “Digital Communications” , 5th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2008. [42] R. Kneser and H. Ney, “Improved backing-off for M-gram language modeling,” in International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing , vol. 1, 1995, pp. 181–184. [43] M. E. Peters, M. Neumann, M. Iyyer, M. Gardner, C. Clark, K. Lee, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Deep Contextualized Word Representations,” in 

Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , 2018, pp. 2227–2237. [44] G. Nemhauser, L. Wolsey, and M. Fisher, “An Analysis of Approxi-mations for Maximizing Submodular Set Functions—I,” Mathematical Programming , vol. 14, pp. 265–294, 1978. [45] J. Edmonds, “Submodular functions, matroids, and certain polyhedra,” in Combinatorial Optimization . Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2003, pp. 11–26. [46] J. Vondrak, “Optimal Approximation for the Submodular Welfare Prob-lem in the Value Oracle Model,” in Proceedings of the Fortieth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , 2008, p. 67–74. [47] C. Chekuri, J. Vondrak, and R. Zenklusen, “Dependent Randomized Rounding via Exchange Properties of Combinatorial Structures,” in 

IEEE 51st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science ,2010, pp. 575–584. [48] S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe, “Convex Optimization” . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.