Title: A Time-Multiplexed Spiking Neural Network Accelerator with Pipelined Readout for FPGA Inference

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.00595v1

Published Time: Tue, 04 Aug 2026 00:44:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# A Time-Multiplexed Spiking Neural Network Accelerator with Pipelined Readout for FPGA Inference 

Reza Ansari and Maciej Wielgosz 

AGH University of Science and Technology, Kraków, Poland 

m.rezaansari71@gmail.com; wielgosz@agh.edu.pl 

# Abstract 

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) provide a power-efficient, neuromorphic alternative to traditional artificial neural networks by processing information via discrete temporal events. This paper presents the design and Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) implementa-tion of an inference-only SNN accelerator optimized for MNIST digit classification. To overcome physical routing constraints and timing bottlenecks inherent in low-cost devices, we propose a highly optimized hardware microar-chitecture. This architecture features a time-multiplexed 1-bit spike-feeding mechanism governed by a finite state machine (FSM) controller, localized distributed mem-ory for weight storage, and an integer-friendly Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) neuron model with optimized register widths to prevent overflow hazards. Further-more, a multi-cycle pipelined argmax and tie-breaker readout module is introduced to eliminate the dominant combinational critical path. Implemented on an entry-level AMD Artix-7 FPGA (XC7A200T) using a 784-64-10 network topology, the proposed pipelined architecture increases the maximum operating frequency ( Fmax ) from 13.3 MHz to 167 MHz. Hardware evaluations demon-strate a sequential processing latency of 82 μs per im-age, completing a 1,000-sample VHDL simulation test batch in 0.082 s. Vivado post-implementation vector-based power analysis yields an estimated total on-chip power consumption of 0.336 W, achieving an estimated en-ergy efficiency of approximately 36,300 samples per Joule. These results highlight the proposed microarchitecture as a resource-efficient solution for real-time neuromorphic edge inference, provided the network size remains within the practical bounds of its time-multiplexed execution. 

Keywords: Field-programmable gate array (FPGA), neuromorphic hardware, pipeline processing, spiking neu-ral networks (SNNs), time-multiplexing. 

# 1 Introduction 

Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) represent a significant shift toward neuromorphic hardware design, offering a biologically inspired alternative to traditional continuous-activation models. By processing information through discrete temporal events, SNNs can significantly reduce computational overhead and power consumption during hardware inference. As a result, they have become a key technology for enhancing the energy efficiency of artificial intelligence tasks deployed at the edge. Mapping SNN architectures to programmable Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) is a critical step in developing custom, scalable inference accelerators. How-ever, translating dense structural connections from soft-ware models directly to hardware topologies introduces significant implementation constraints. Specifically, di-rect spatial mapping often leads to increased interconnect routing pressure, where multi-bit fan-out requirements can exceed available physical wiring tracks. Furthermore, the final classification layer—typically involving combina-tional argmax trees—presents a critical path bottleneck that can severely limit the maximum operating frequency (Fmax ) of the overall hardware system. To address these challenges, this paper outlines the design, implementation, and verification of a compact, inference-only SNN accelerator optimized for FPGAs. We emphasize that the primary contribution of this work is not a new SNN learning algorithm, but an integrated hardware microarchitecture. Rather than presenting a single optimization in isolation, the principal novelty lies in the holistic integration of time-multiplexed spike distribution, localized weight storage, integer-based LIF processing, and a multi-cycle spike-count and potential-based readout engine. By translating a baseline artificial neural network into this cohesive architecture, this work provides a framework for low-power classification that is verified directly against a software reference model. Specifically, the integrated contributions of this work are: 1. A time-multiplexed 1-bit spike-feeding scheme that serializes dense input fan-out into a routable broad-cast bus; 2. A localized memory buffer organization that avoids large, power-intensive combinational weight fan-out; 3. An integer-based LIF neuron model with register widths sized strictly to avoid overflow; 4. A multi-cycle pipelined argmax and tie-breaker read-out engine that removes the dominant combinational critical path; and 1arXiv:2608.00595v1 [cs.AR] 1 Aug 2026 5. A comprehensive timing-closure and power analysis that quantifies the resulting improvements in fre-quency and energy efficiency. The remainder of this article is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the state of the art in neuromorphic hardware. Section 3 describes the proposed hardware architecture, including the LIF neuron design and the centralized control flow. Section 4 details the experimen-tal setup, validation methodology, and implementation results. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper. 

# 2 Related Work 

The shift from traditional von Neumann architectures to neuromorphic computing has been driven by the in-creasing demand for energy-efficient processing at the edge. Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have emerged as a prominent solution, leveraging the sparsity and tempo-ral dynamics of biological systems to achieve low-power machine intelligence [1]. While advancements such as the Loihi manycore processor demonstrate the efficiency gains of executing asynchronous, spike-based workloads directly on silicon [2], mapping SNN architectures to programmable Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FP-GAs) remains a critical challenge for developing scalable, custom inference accelerators [3]. A common paradigm for neuromorphic inference in-volves converting pre-trained Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) into SNNs, thereby avoiding the training insta-bility associated with direct spike-based backpropagation [4]. However, translating dense structural connections from software models to hardware topologies imposes significant physical constraints. Direct spatial mapping on FPGA fabrics often introduces severe interconnect routing pressure, where high-fanout requirements exceed available routing resources and induce substantial com-binational propagation delays. To mitigate these bot-tlenecks, existing literature explores time-multiplexed sequencing, processing-element folding, and centralized finite state machine (FSM) controllers to serialize spike delivery across unified internal buses [5]. These strate-gies effectively balance parallel execution with design routability, trading absolute single-cycle throughput for improved resource utilization and higher achievable clock frequencies. Beyond structural routing, the final classification layer of hardware SNN accelerators presents an additional crit-ical path constraint that has received limited attention in literature [6]. Traditional hardware implementations of the decision-making stage typically rely on purely combinational argmax trees to evaluate winner-take-all behavior within a single clock cycle. As the number of output classes or internal metrics scales, these wide com-binational structures introduce significant logic depth, adversely affecting the Worst Negative Slack (WNS) and limiting the maximum operating frequency ( Fmax ) of the system. While pipelining is standard practice in conventional deep learning accelerators to isolate long combinational paths, its systematic application within neuromorphic readout units—particularly when manag-ing multi-tier decision rules like spike counting paired with secondary membrane potential tie-breakers—remains less extensively documented [7]. Implementing multi-cycle, multi-stage pipelined classification architectures allows for balanced logic depth across successive regis-ters, effectively mitigating timing violations on resource-constrained FPGA fabrics. 

# 3 Hardware Architecture and Im-plementation Details 

Figure 1 presents an architectural overview of the pro-posed SNN accelerator, illustrating the pipelined exe-cution flow structured across three stages: ingestion, processing, and decision-making. At the ingestion stage, incoming stimulus data is held in the Input Buffer and decoded by the Spike Driver into discrete spike events. These events are driven into the Processing Core, where a parallel Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) Array interfaces with localized memory buffers to fetch and update synap-tic weights and membrane potentials. Finally, in the decision stage, output spikes generated by the LIF array are accumulated by counters over a designated temporal window. An Argmax block evaluates these parallel totals to determine the maximum spike activity, outputting the final classification index. This modular, feed-forward topology reduces global routing overhead on the FPGA while supporting parallel processing requirements. The development of the proposed hardware acceler-ator begins with establishing an algorithmic baseline in software before translating the design into hardware-compatible primitives. A standard Artificial Neural Net-work (ANN) featuring a three-layer topology (784-64-10) is trained on the MNIST dataset using the PyTorch li-brary. While a larger configuration containing 128 hidden neurons was initially evaluated, evaluation indicated that a 64-neuron hidden layer achieves a baseline classification accuracy of 97.0%, which is comparable to the 97.7% accu-racy obtained with the 128-neuron alternative. Reducing the hidden layer size by half reduces the physical routing and logic footprint constraints on the target FPGA fabric during implementation. To avoid the use of floating-point arithmetic units in hardware, the extracted continuous floating-point weights ( Wf,l ) for each layer l are mapped to 8-bit signed integers ( Wq,l ) through a uniform linear quantization process, defined as: 

Wq,l = clamp (round ( Sl · Wf,l ) , −128 , 127) (1) where Sl = 127 / max( |Wf,l |) represents a layer-dependent scaling factor computed from the absolute peak weight boundaries of that specific layer, and the clamping oper-ation restricts the outputs to the valid range of an 8-bit 2I. INGESTION STAGE II. PROCESSING CORE III. DECISION STAGE       

> Input Buffer (784 Pixels) Spike Driver LIF Compute Array Local Memory Buffers Spike Counters (10 Channels ×4-bit) Pipelined Argmax & Tie-Breaker (Readout Engine)
> Raw Spike Data /1 Time-Mux Spikes /1 Address & Control Bus Weights /8 Potentials /32 Output Spikes /1 Accumulated Totals /4 Predicted Class /4

Figure 1: Proposed hardware accelerator microarchitecture optimized for low-cost FPGAs, explicitly illustrating data-path bit-widths, localized dual-bus memory boundaries, and the multi-cycle pipelined decision stage.         

> LIF Neuron Processing Element (PE) Arithmetic Core Synaptic Current
> Isyn (32-bit) +−Membrane Potential (32-bit) ≥Out FF (1-bit) Threshold ( θ)
> Output Spike
> RST MUX
> 0132’h0
> ≫leak _shif t
> /32 Fire /1 Decayed Base Potential
> Feedback Reset Select

Figure 2: Hardware-efficient, multiplier-free RTL microar-chitecture of the proposed Processing Element (PE). The architecture implements direct synaptic current ( Isyn ) in-tegration and shift-based leak mechanics mapped directly to the discrete-time dynamics in (2). signed integer ( int8 ) [8]. As seen in Equation 1, this quantization methodology allows all subsequent synaptic accumulations within the hardware layers to execute via integer operations, reducing resource consumption and improving operational efficiency in the evaluated setup. To drive the neuromorphic core, the static 784-pixel MNIST grayscale images are converted into a temporal format compatible with the Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) neurons. This design utilizes a rate-encoding mech-anism where each pixel’s normalized intensity determines its firing probability over a discrete temporal window 

T [9]. To implement the Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) neuron dynamics on the FPGA fabric without requiring hardware multiplication or division units, the continuous-time leakage is realized using an arithmetic right-shift operation. The discrete-time membrane potential V for a given neuron at timestep t + 1 is modeled as: 

V [t + 1] = V [t] − (V [t] ≫ leak_shift) + Isyn [t] (2) where leak_shift represents the bit-shift parameter con-trolling the decay rate, and Isyn [t] is the spatial synaptic current accumulated during the current execution layer. The hardware implementation corresponding to these simplified neuron dynamics is illustrated in Fig. 2. To ensure reproducibility, the pseudorandom spike-generation process is evaluated across five independent Table 1: SNN Classification Accuracy (%) Grid Search Results for Time Window T = 16 (Evaluated over a 1,000-Sample validation Subset)                                                                                                          

> Threshold (θ)sh=0 sh=1 sh=2 sh=3 sh=4 sh=5 sh=6 sh=7
> 25 68.4 69.7 70.3 70.3 69.8 70.1 69.8 70.0 50 76.6 75.8 76.2 75.4 75.5 75.5 75.4 75.2 100 88.5 86.4 85.1 84.8 84.1 84.2 84.3 84.1 200 92.1 95.0 94.3 94.3 94.2 94.1 94.0 94.0 300 90.1 95.1 97.1 96.9 96.5 96.6 96.4 96.4 350 87.3 96.2 97.1 97.3 97.2 96.9 96.8 96.6 400 83.9 95.6 97.4 97.1 97.3 97.5 97.1 97.3
> 450 78.9 95.1 97.2 97.1 97.4 97.4 97.6 97.6 500 71.3 94.1 97.4 97.3 97.0 97.0 97.2 97.2 550 64.4 92.9 97.0 97.4 97.2 96.9 97.0 96.9 600 54.2 91.5 97.2 97.2 97.2 97.4 97.4 97.4 650 47.5 90.7 96.4 97.4 97.4 97.0 97.0 97.0

random seeds (42, 43, 44, 45, and 46) to mitigate potential bias from a single sequence. The length of this temporal processing window, along with the operational parameters of the network, was determined through a parameter grid search evaluating various firing thresholds ( θ) and membrane leak rates. To prevent test-set leakage, the 60,000-sample MNIST training dataset was partitioned: the baseline artificial neural network (ANN) was trained on a 59,000-sample split, while a 1,000-sample validation split was used for this SNN parameter grid search. The 10,000-sample MNIST test set was reserved for the final evaluation. The results of this grid search on the validation split for a temporal window of T = 16 are compiled in Table 1. The evaluation indicates that low thresholds introduce additional temporal noise, whereas higher leak rates (e.g., leak_shift ∈ { 0, 1}) rapidly decay the membrane poten-tial, reducing neural activity and classification accuracy. The grid search shows a maximum validation accuracy of 97.6% at a threshold of θ = 450, obtained with both leak_shift = 6 and leak_shift = 7. To resolve this tie, the configuration with leak_shift = 6 is selected. A higher leak rate reduces sub-threshold membrane accumulation from background noise while still allowing sufficiently driven neurons to cross their activation boundaries. This supports information propa-gation [10, 11] without introducing the noise and random firings observed at lower thresholds (e.g., θ ≤ 200) [12]. Consequently, the θ = 450 and leak_shift = 6 configura-3Table 2: Bit-Accurate Software Reference SNN Classifi-cation Accuracy on the Full 10,000-Sample MNIST Test Set Across 5 Random Seeds ( θ = 450, leak_shift = 6) 

Random Seed Test-Set Accuracy (%) 

42 96.69 43 96.71 44 96.65 45 96.69 46 96.75 

Mean ± Std Dev 96.70 ± 0.04 Baseline ANN (10 epochs, Adam) 97.70 

tion is selected as the target configuration for physical VHDL mapping. Following parameter optimization, the bit-accurate soft-ware reference SNN model was evaluated on the 10,000-sample MNIST test set across all five random seeds. Due to extensive simulation runtimes, this full 10,000-sample evaluation was conducted purely in software to evaluate algorithmic variance, while a 1,000-sample subset was utilized to verify the structural equivalency of the VHDL hardware. The results of this software evaluation are detailed in Table 2. In the evaluated setup, the base-line continuous-activation ANN (trained with Adam for 10 epochs) achieves an evaluated test-set accuracy of 97.70%. In comparison, the optimized hardware SNN configuration yields a mean test-set accuracy of 96.70% ±

0.04%. This represents an ANN-to-SNN conversion drop of 1.00%. Given the constraints of the 16-timestep archi-tecture, this result demonstrates that the model preserves the algorithmic fidelity of the baseline network, main-taining stable classification performance across varying temporal noise profiles. 

3.1 Centralized Finite State Machine (FSM) and Control Flow 

To coordinate the temporal execution windows and se-quential layer dependencies while preventing routing con-gestion or race conditions, the neuromorphic accelerator is synchronized by a centralized Finite State Machine (FSM) layer controller. This controller manages the progression of algorithmic steps across both structural layers over the duration of the discrete temporal window ( T = 16). The architectural state progression, as illustrated in Fig-ure 3, is divided into ten deterministic functional states operating in a closed loop. The functional execution sequence operates via the following structured state progression: 1. IDLE : The initial quiescent state. The controller holds all internal blocks inactive until an exter-nal master handshake trigger asserts the start line (start = ’1’), transitioning the FSM into the hidden layer loading cycle. 2. LOAD_HIDDEN_LAYER : A 784-clock-cycle iteration over the input pixel space (0 ≤           

> IDLE STATE
> Initial quiescent state
> LOAD_HIDDEN_LAYER
> Loop: pixel_counter 0 to 783
> HIDDEN_ISYN_READY
> Assert prep_Isyn_hidden
> HIDDEN_LIF_PROCESSING
> Assert en_lif_hidden
> LOAD_OUTPUT_LAYER
> Loop: neuron_counter 0 to 63
> OUTPUT_ISYN_READY
> Assert prep_Isyn_output
> OUTPUT_LIF_PROCESSING
> Assert en_lif_output
> OUTPUT_SPIKE_COUNTING
> Assert count_spike_valid
> ARGMAX_COMPUTING Assert calculate_argmax |Wait : prediction_ready = ’1’
> RESET_STATE
> Clear reset_counter, rst_V
> start = ’1’ pixel_counter == 783 neuron_counter == 63 timestep_counter == T - 1 sample_counter <NUM_SAMPLES - 1 pixel_counter <783 neuron_counter <63 timestep_counter <T - 1 Increment timestep Next Sample sample_counter == NUM_SAMPLES - 1 (Final Sample)

Figure 3: Algorithmic state machine diagram of the centralized FSM layer controller. pixel_counter ≤ 783). At each clock edge, the 

input_spike_driver broadcasts a single 1-bit pixel spike across a shared bus to all 64 hidden layer synapse accumulators simultaneously. Each accumu-lator concurrently indexes its localized memory to aggregate the respective 8-bit weight if a spike is present. 3. HIDDEN_ISYN_READY : A single-cycle syn-chronization barrier reached immediately after the 784-pixel iteration. The controller asserts 

prep_Isyn_hidden , causing all 64 hidden accumu-lators to latch their total internal current sums onto the 32-bit I_syn ports of the corresponding hidden LIF neurons while clearing internal tracking registers for the next timestep. 4. HIDDEN_LIF_PROCESSING : A single-cycle state executing parallel neuron evaluation. Asserting 

en_lif_hidden = ’1’ activates all 64 hidden Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) neurons concurrently. On the rising clock edge, each neuron updates its mem-brane potential via a multiplierless right-shift leak 4subtraction and synaptic current addition (Equation 2). Neurons exceeding the threshold ( θ) register an output spike (’1’) and reset their membrane poten-tial register ( V ) to zero; otherwise, the spike register is cleared (’0’) and Vnext is retained. 5. LOAD_OUTPUT_LAYER : A 64-clock-cycle it-eration over the hidden neuron layer (0 ≤ neuron_ counter ≤ 63). At each rising clock edge, the regis-tered 1-bit output spike from the active hidden neu-ron is broadcast to all 10 classification output-layer synapse accumulators in parallel. Each accumulator concurrently samples this line and indexes its local weight inside its internal register. 6. OUTPUT_ISYN_READY : A single-cycle mem-ory barrier following the 64-neuron iteration. The controller asserts prep_Isyn_output to latch the 10 accumulated synaptic current values directly onto the 32-bit I_syn input lines of the output layer LIF neurons, while resetting the synapse accumulator blocks and weight pointers back to zero. 7. OUTPUT_LIF_PROCESSING : A single-cycle execution state where the controller asserts en_lif_ output = ’1’. This drives the 10 output-layer LIF neurons to compute their updated potentials and evaluate threshold boundaries concurrently. 8. OUTPUT_SPIKE_COUNTING : A single-cycle evaluation state where the controller asserts 

count_spike_valid , instructing 10 independent tracking registers to sample the output spike lines and increment if a firing event occurred. If the tem-poral window is incomplete (timestep_counter <T − 1), the loop increments and transitions back to LOAD_HIDDEN_LAYER ; if completed, it advances to readout. 9. ARGMAX_COMPUTING : Reached at the end of the temporal processing window ( t = T − 1). The controller asserts calculate_argmax and waits until the argmax unit asserts prediction_ready = ’1’. If more validation images remain, the FSM triggers a system reset via reset_counter and rst_V and ad-vances to the RESET_STATE ; if the final sample is reached, it returns to IDLE .10. RESET_STATE : Positioned at the end of a com-plete sample execution window. Over one clock cycle, the controller drives the clear lines back to ’0’ after clearing prior membrane accumulations and spike registers across the fabric, before transitioning back into LOAD_HIDDEN_LAYER to process the first timestep of the subsequent sample. 

3.2 Memory Architecture and Time-Multiplexed Spike Broadcasting 

Directly mapping a dense 784-to-64 layer onto an FPGA fabric can result in high interconnect fan-out, requiring over 400,000 signal lines (784 × 64 × 8-bit weights), potentially leading to routing congestion and increased critical-path delays. To mitigate these routing constraints, the proposed architecture combines a time-multiplexed 1-bit broadcasting bus with an isolated, localized buffer memory organization scheme. This approach splits the implementation into distinct synthesis-time phases and runtime execution loops, as illustrated in Figure 4. During design elaboration and hardware compilation, the synthesizer removes the need for external runtime flash communication or high-overhead memory inter-faces by executing VHDL compile-time impure func-tions . The function load_spike_patterns opens raw, formatted text data vectors and sequentially flattens the complete multi-sample dataset directly into a local-ized, un-routed continuous hardware array known as the input_memory_buffer . Simultaneously, the func-tion load_weights processes the quantized 8-bit integer matrix elements, parsing and distributing them directly into local look-up structures dedicated to each individual synapse accumulator module. Operating in parallel, each of the 64 synapse accumu-lators monitors the state of the unified 1-bit broadcast line. At each clock edge, the accumulator modules use the global pixel_idx pointer to address their own local buffer, retrieving the specific 8-bit signed weight associ-ated with the current pixel sequence. If the broadcasted input spike bit is evaluated as HIGH (’1’), the accumula-tor adds the retrieved weight value to an internal 32-bit accumulation register. Conversely, if the spike line is 

LOW (’0’), the accumulation stage is bypassed, reducing dynamic power consumption. This architecture converts a spatial routing bottleneck into a time-multiplexed sequence. Instead of utilizing extensive routing resources and logic adders within a single clock cycle, the network processes the connections over 784 consecutive clock cycles. Upon completion of the loop, the accumulated sums are latched onto the 32-bit I_syn output bus feeding the LIF neurons, and the internal accumulation registers are cleared to prepare for the next evaluation cycle. 

3.3 Hardware Verification and Auto-mated Grading Testbench 

To assess functional equivalence between the sequential Python reference model and the synthesized VHDL ar-chitecture in the tested simulation setup, an automated, self-checking testbench was developed. Rather than man-ually inspecting timing waveforms for individual inference cycles, the testbench environment was designed to exe-cute a continuous, batch-processing VHDL simulation of 5Elaboration & Compilation Phase Hardware Runtime Simulation 

> w_hidden.mem / w_output.mem spike_patterns.mem Text File
> impure function:
> load_weights
> Skips to neuron_idx, reads impure function:
> load_spike_patterns
> Reads total_bits
> input_memory_buffer
> Flat Spike Array
> weights_array
> Local memory buffer per Accumulator
> Layer Controller Pointers
> sample_idx, timestep_idx, pixel_idx
> input_spike_driver
> Instantly maps pointers to flat buffer index
> 1-bit spike_out synapse_accumulator
> if input_spike is HIGH, add weights
> prep_Isyn is HIGH? Increment weights_idx Latch I_syn_internal to I_syn Output 32-bit I_syn to LIF Neuron
> Initializes Initializes Broadcast to layer No Loops 784 or 64 cycles Yes Layer processing complete

Figure 4: Structural breakdown of compilation-level elab-oration versus physical hardware runtime execution. 1, 000 samples from the MNIST test set, automatically evaluating the hardware’s predictive accuracy against the software’s reference baseline. The structural flow of this verification environment is illustrated in Fig. 5. The simulation environment is driven by a 100 MHz testbench clock generator. The simulation begins with a 30 ns global reset sequence to initialize all internal neuron membrane registers, state machines, and synapse accumulators. Following the reset, the testbench incre-ments a master sample counter (0 to 999) and triggers the top-level SNN module by asserting the start signal for a single clock cycle. The testbench suspends its stimulus generation and waits for the SNN core to assert the prediction_ready 

flag. Upon detecting the rising edge of this flag, the test-bench captures the 4-bit output on the predicted_label 

bus and logs it into a localized memory array. This hand-shake sequence is repeated until all 1 , 000 images have been processed. Once the hardware runtime simulation concludes, the testbench enters an automated verification phase. The testbench iterates through the stored array of hardware predictions, comparing each entry against a pre-loaded ground-truth memory array containing the true MNIST labels. The simulation console tallies the correct predic-tions and calculates the final inference accuracy, demon-strating that the integer-based hardware aligns with the Python baseline in the evaluated setup without requiring manual waveform inspection.  

> Elaboration & Compile Time Simulation Startup Runtime Execution & Signal Monitoring Automated Grading & Reporting
> labels.mem True Labels
> impure function:
> load_correct_labels
> Reads 1000 lines
> correct_labels array Compile-time Constant Clock Generator Process
> Oscillates continuously at 100 MHz
> Reset Sequence
> Asserts rst for 30 ns then deasserts
> Trigger SNN Core
> Asserts start signal for exactly 1 clock cycle
> Increment sample_id sample_id == NUM_SAMPLES? prediction_ready is HIGH on rising_edge clk? Capture predicted_label Store in predicted_labels Loop index i from 0 to 999
> Compare predicted labels array vs true labels array
> predicted_labels i == correct_labels i ? Increment correct_predictions count Move to next Calculate accuracy Terminate Simulation
> Initializes No No Yes All samples tracked Yes No Loop finished

Figure 5: Architectural flowchart of the automated VHDL testbench, detailing the hardware runtime sim-ulation, synchronous handshaking, and the automated post-simulation grading loop. 

# 4 Experimental Results and Hard-ware Evaluation 

To establish a transparent and rigorous evaluation frame-work, the experimental analysis in this work is struc-tured across three distinct scopes: (1) algorithmic fidelity and variance are evaluated using the 10,000-sample, bit-accurate software SNN reference model across five random seeds; (2) functional equivalence of the VHDL hardware is validated against this software baseline using a 1,000-sample simulation testbench; and (3) physical hardware performance metrics—including operating frequency, pro-cessing latency, and on-chip power consumption—are de-rived exclusively from Vivado post-implementation timing and power analyses. To evaluate the feasibility, timing performance, and re-source efficiency of the proposed Spiking Neural Network (SNN) hardware accelerator, synthesis and implementa-tion were conducted using the AMD Vivado Design Suite targeting the AMD Artix-7 AC701 Evaluation Platform XC7A200T FPGA. As an entry-level, low-power FPGA platform, this target device serves as a benchmark for evaluating the performance and resource efficiency of the microarchitecture in the evaluated setup. To establish a comparative baseline, the high-level Python algorithmic reference model was profiled sequen-tially on a host system equipped with an Intel Core Ultra 6Table 3: Reproducibility and Implementation Details.                                      

> Item Value
> FPGA board / evaluation platform AMD Artix-7 AC701 Exact FPGA part xc7a200tfbg676-2 Vivado version 2023.2 Synthesis strategy Vivado Synthesis Defaults Implementation strategy V1: Vivado Implementation Defaults V2: Performance_ExtraTimingOpt Target clock constraint (V1 / V2) 75 ns / 6 ns Achieved Fmax (V1 / V2) 13.3 MHz / 167 MHz LUTs (abs. / %) V1: 17,021 (12.72%) out of 133,800 V2: 15,985 (11.95%) out of 133,800 Flip-Flops (abs. / %) V1: 7,957 (2.96%) out of 269,200 V2: 8,018 (2.98%) out of 269,200 BRAM tiles (abs. / %) V1: 0 (0%) | V2: 0 (0%) DSP slices (abs. / %) V1: 0 (0%) | V2: 0 (0%) Hidden / output accumulator width 32-bit Weight quantization int8, scale Sl= 127 /max( |Wl|)Spike encoding rate coding, seed = 42 Number of timesteps T16 Latency per sample (cycles / μs) V1: 13,647 cycles ×75 ns ≈1,024 μsV2: 13,669 cycles ×6 ns ≈82 μsVHDL source modules Top-Level: snn_top_level.vhd
> Submodules: lif_neuron.vhd ,
> synapse_accumulator.vhd ,
> input_spike_driver.vhd ,
> layer_controller.vhd ,
> output_counter.vhd ,
> argmax_unit.vhd

9 275HX processor operating at a maximum turbo fre-quency of 5.4 GHz. This evaluation framework enables a comparison between sequential software execution and the parallelized FPGA implementations. Consequently, this section presents an empirical performance analysis benchmarking the initial non-pipelined readout architec-ture (Version 1) and the multi-cycle pipelined sequential argmax core (Version 2) against the CPU software refer-ence. Both hardware configurations are evaluated under timing constraints defined within a hardware constraints file ( constants.xdc ) to characterize critical path propa-gation delays, Worst Negative Slack (WNS), estimated maximum operating frequencies ( Fmax ), estimated on-chip power dissipation, and Look-Up Table (LUT) fab-ric utilization. To support experimental reproducibility, the implementation details, synthesis configurations, and system-level parameters for both design versions are sum-marized in Table 3. Power consumption was evaluated post-implementation using the AMD Vivado Design Suite Power Analysis tool. To establish a baseline comparable with existing FPGA accelerators in the literature, the default vectorless es-timation mode is first utilized, which applies a uniform 12.5% signal switching activity across the unconstrained design nets. However, because the vectorless estimation does not fully account for the temporal and data-driven sparsity of Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs), these base-line metrics represent a conservative upper bound in the evaluated setup. To evaluate the estimated power characteristics of the architecture, a vector-based power analysis is also con-ducted. Simulated switching activity is precisely gener-ated using the Vivado Simulator (XSim) during a behav-ioral simulation of the 1,000-sample MNIST test batch. The resulting toggle rates and static probabilities are recorded by exporting a Switching Activity Interchange Format (.saif) file. During the Vivado power evalua-tion phase, this SAIF file is applied to annotate the post-implementation design, providing high activity cov-erage for the internal logic and ensuring the estimation tracks the event-driven SNN operational sparsity much more accurately than static vectorless assumptions. To provide a comprehensive analysis, both vectorless and vector-based methodologies are analyzed, isolating static, dynamic, and I/O power dissipation. The Vivado report summaries for both architectural versions under both execution modes are provided in Appendix A. 

4.1 Output Classification and the Argmax Decision Core 

Following the completion of the T = 16 temporal inte-gration cycles, the final classification of the MNIST digit is determined by evaluating the cumulative spike events across the 10 output-layer LIF neurons. To achieve this, an independent output_counter hardware module is in-stantiated for each output channel to track the discrete fir-ing events. At the end of the processing window, the cen-tral controller asserts the calculate_argmax signal, halt-ing further accumulation and activating the argmax_unit .This module iterates through the 10 counter registers to identify the index corresponding to the maximum spike count. To resolve scenarios where all output neurons fail to fire, the architecture utilizes the final residual membrane potentials as a tie-breaker in the evaluated setup. This mechanism is designed to provide a predic-tion by utilizing the sub-threshold integration state of the LIF neurons when discrete spike outputs are absent [13]. The mathematical representation of this rate-coded winner-take-all classification strategy is expressed as: Prediction = 



argmax 

> i∈{ 0,..., 9}

(Si), if ∑ Si > 0argmax 

> i∈{ 0,..., 9}

(Vi[T ]) , otherwise (3) where Si represents the total accumulated spike count for output neuron i, and Vi[T ] denotes its final membrane potential at the end of the temporal window. For the initial timing characterization of this baseline configuration, the hardware constraints file specifies a target clock period ( Ttarget ) of 10 ns, corresponding to a nominal operating frequency of 100 MHz. Following post-implementation timing analysis, the design exhibits a Worst Negative Slack (WNS) violation of −49 .380 ns, indicating that the single-cycle execution path does not satisfy the targeted clock boundaries due to propagation delays [14] in the evaluated setup. The estimated maxi-mum operating frequency ( Fmax ) for this non-pipelined 7configuration is calculated using Equation 4: 

Fmax = 1

Ttarget − WNS = 159 .38 ns ≈ 16 .8 MHz (4) Timing path analysis indicates that this delay is local-ized within the single-cycle combinational tree of the initial argmax_unit . To execute the comparison opera-tions across the 10 output registers and evaluate the sub-threshold membrane potentials as a tie-breaker within a single clock cycle, the synthesis engine implements more than 100 levels of look-up table (LUT) logic fabric [15]. While Equation 4 identifies a theoretical minimum clock period of 59 .38 ns (16 .8 MHz) based on the initial tim-ing failure, practical FPGA implementation requires a relaxed target constraint to guarantee stable routing and positive slack across all physical device corners. Conse-quently, the system clock constraint was conservatively relaxed to 75 ns (13 .33 MHz) [16]. Re-synthesizing the architecture under this 75 ns constraint successfully miti-gated all setup violations, yielding a stable, positive Worst Negative Slack (WNS) of +2 .02 ns in the evaluated setup. Operating at this frequency, the non-pipelined VHDL SNN architecture completes a single MNIST classifica-tion pass with a per-sample hardware core runtime of 1.024 ms (1024 μs). In contrast, the unoptimized sequen-tial software reference requires approximately 84 ms per sample for the same workload. Consequently, despite running at a lower clock frequency than the host pro-cessor, the hardware accelerator achieves a speedup of approximately 82 × relative to the unoptimized software reference in the evaluated setup. However, compared to a vectorized NumPy baseline with an execution latency of approximately 277 μs per sample on the CPU, this non-pipelined hardware configuration is outperformed by the vectorized software implementation by a factor of ap-proximately 3 .7×. This performance difference illustrates the limitations of a non-pipelined design and motivates the pipelined readout architecture introduced in Section 4.2. These baseline performance ratios are expressed via Equation 5: 

SV1 =



TPy,unopt 

TVHDL 

≈ 82 ×, vs. unoptimized 

TNumPy,opt 

TVHDL 

≈ 0.27 ×, vs. vectorized (5) where SV1 represents the baseline hardware speedup fac-tor. The execution latencies per sample for the unopti-mized Python pipeline ( TPy,unopt = 84 ms/sample) and the optimized NumPy implementation ( TNumPy,opt =277 μs/sample) are benchmarked directly against the localized VHDL accelerator core processing latency (TVHDL = 1 .024 ms). This acceleration is driven by the spatial parallelism of the hardware. At each clock edge, all 64 hidden-layer and 10 output-layer LIF neurons concurrently execute their membrane potential updates, arithmetic leak operations, and threshold evaluations. To establish an empirical reference point for energy performance, the software baselines running on the In-tel Core Ultra 9 processor were profiled using hardware VRM telemetry via HWInfo64 [17]. Under a full inference workload, the unoptimized sequential reference exhibits a sustained average power dissipation of 56 W at an average core clock of 3 .0 GHz. Given its 84 ms per-sample execu-tion time, it consumes ≈ 4.704 Joules per sample, result-ing in a nominal energy throughput of ≈ 0.213 samples/J. In comparison, the vectorized NumPy implementation utilizes the CPU’s parallel execution pipelines, drawing a steady-state average power of 49 W at a lower core clock of 2 .85 GHz due to the hardware’s automated AVX frequency offsets [18]. This software optimization rep-resents a batched scenario where data is grouped into parallel matrix operations to maximize execution pipeline utilization. While this parallel framework minimizes ex-ecution overhead and reduces the estimated total soft-ware energy consumed to ≈ 0.0136 Joules per sample (yielding an estimated operational software efficiency of 

≈ 73 .68 samples/J), it represents an offline throughput metric rather than a real-time edge streaming pipeline. In the evaluated setup, post-implementation power anal-ysis within the AMD Vivado Design Suite provides an estimated vector-based total on-chip power consumption of 0 .177 W (with a default vectorless estimate of 0 .164 W reported solely for structural evaluation consistency with external works). This operational power footprint demon-strates an estimated computational energy efficiency, for-malized using primary vector-based metrics in Equation 6 as: 

ηV1 = 1

TVHDL × PV1 

≈ 5.52 × 10 3 samples/J (6) where ηV1 represents the baseline hardware energy effi-ciency, calculated using the previously defined operational latency TVHDL alongside the post-implementation core power dissipation ( PV1 = 0 .177 W). To evaluate the relative energy efficiency differences between the general-purpose execution pipelines and the hardware architecture [19], the relative energy efficiency gain of the baseline hardware over both software imple-mentations is evaluated in Equation 

ηrel =



ηV1 

ηCPU,unopt 

≈ 2.6 × 10 4×, vs. unoptimized 

ηV1 

ηCPU,opt 

≈ 75 ×, vs. vectorized (7) where ηrel represents the relative hardware efficiency gain. The baseline accelerator efficiency ( ηV1 = 5517 sam-ples/J) is compared directly against the unoptimized CPU reference ( ηCPU,unopt = 0 .213 samples/J) and the optimized, vectorized CPU baseline ( ηCPU,opt = 73 .68 samples/J), respectively. In the evaluated setup, the baseline hardware architecture indicates an estimated 

≈ 26000 × increase in throughput-per-watt over the unop-timized reference, along with a ≈ 75 × efficiency gain over 8the vectorized software baseline running on the evaluated CPU. This demonstrates the power-scaling characteristics associated with specialized edge hardware designs, prior to introducing temporal pipelined optimizations. Finally, physical resource utilization maps onto the target Artix-7 fabric, consuming 13% of the available Look-Up Tables (LUTs) and 3% of the Flip-Flop (FF) registers. Due to the multiplierless design of the archi-tecture, weight matrices and neuron states are unrolled by the compiler into combinational logic (LUTs) and dis-tributed registers (Flip-Flops). This mitigates memory access constraints associated with physical BRAM tiles, enabling parallel data access [5]. In the evaluated setup, this configuration demonstrates that the parallel neuron math circuits and the baseline combinational argmax tree fit within the device fabric with available headroom, as observed in the post-implementation floorplan layout pro-vided in Appendix B. This utilization indicates physical scalability for accommodating deeper or wider network architectures on a single device. 

4.2 Microarchitectural Optimization: Pipelined Sequential Argmax (Ver-sion 2) 

To resolve the timing violation (WNS = −49 .380 ns) identified in the baseline hardware design, a microar-chitectural optimization was implemented within the 

argmax_unit . The unrolled, purely combinational loop structures of Version 1 were replaced by a synchronous, multi-cycle Finite State Machine (FSM) control path, as detailed in the behavioral VHDL implementation of Version 2. Rather than replicating hardware comparators spatially—which increases the look-up table (LUT) logic path depth within a single clock cycle—this approach implements temporal multiplexing, re-using a single com-parator slice across consecutive clock edges. The FSM control logic is governed by five op-erational states: IDLE , COMPARE_SPIKE_COUNTS ,

COMPARE_MEMBRANE_POTENTIALS ,

REPORT_PREDICTED_LABEL , and WAIT_FOR_RESET .The corresponding state transitions and decision logic are illustrated in Fig. 6. In the IDLE state, the module holds the synchronous output flag prediction_ready low while resetting the loop iteration index i to 1 and initializing the predicted label index Lpred to 0. The FSM awaits the assertion of the control signal calculate_argmax from the central layer controller. Upon assertion, the system transitions to 

COMPARE_SPIKE_COUNTS , where the FSM iterates through the 10 output-channel spike accumulation registers over a 9-cycle window. At each rising clock edge, the circuit evaluates the conditional inequality defined in (8): 

Lpred ←

{

i, if Si > S Lpred 

Lpred , otherwise (8)       

> COMPARE_SPIKE_COUNTS COMPARE_MEMBRANE_POTENTIALS REPORT_PREDICTED_LABEL WAIT_FOR_RESET IDLE
> counter == 10 AND Max Spike == 0 [Reset Counter] counter == 10 Assert prediction_ready = ’1’ Latch predicted_label Deassert prediction_ready = ’0’ counter <10 [Evaluate Max Spike] counter <10 [Evaluate Max Potential] calculate_argmax == ’0’ counter == 10 AND Max Spike >0calculate_argmax == ’1’ [Reset Counters & Labels]

Figure 6: Finite State Machine (FSM) state diagram of the optimized sequential argmax_unit (Version 2), showing multi-cycle decision branching and conditional sub-threshold membrane potential tie-breaking. where Si denotes the accumulated spike count for output channel i.Once i reaches 10, the FSM executes a conditional con-trol branch. If the maximum accumulated spike count is strictly greater than zero (max( Si) > 0), the tie-breaker mechanism is bypassed, and the FSM transitions directly to REPORT_PREDICTED_LABEL . Conversely, if no spikes were recorded across the output layer, the FSM branches to COMPARE_MEMBRANE_POTENTIALS to resolve the infer-ence tie-condition. In this state, the FSM re-initializes the iteration index i to 1 and executes a secondary com-parison pass over 9 clock cycles, evaluating sub-threshold integration states as defined in (9): 

Lpred ←

{

i, if Vi[T ] > V Lpred [T ]

Lpred , otherwise (9) where Vi[T ] denotes the final membrane potential of output channel i at the terminal time step T .Following the completion of the tie-breaking pass, the FSM enters REPORT_PREDICTED_LABEL , latching the com-puted Lpred onto the primary output bus and asserting 

prediction_ready high. The sequence concludes with a single-cycle WAIT_FOR_RESET state, ensuring a synchro-nized handshake before returning to the IDLE state. By distributing execution latency over a variable window of 12 to 22 clock cycles, this microarchitectural change isolates the critical path within a single comparator block, facilitating significantly improved timing closure. 94.3 Post-Optimization Implementation Results 

The transition to a multi-cycle Finite State Machine (FSM) addressed the combinational bottleneck of the argmax unit. Synthesizing the revised architecture (Ver-sion 2) on the Artix-7 FPGA with a target clock period of 6 ns yields a positive Worst Negative Slack (WNS) of +0.09 ns. This indicates that the design operates at a maximum frequency ( Fmax ) of approximately 167 MHz in the evaluated setup. At this clock rate, the cycle-accurate simulated latency to process a single test sample is evalu-ated at 82 μs. To evaluate this optimization across both software execution paradigms, the performance accelera-tion factors relative to the 5.4 GHz CPU are presented in Equation 10: 

SV2 =



TPy,unopt 

TVHDL,V2 

≈ 1.02 × 10 3×, vs. unoptimized 

TNumPy,opt 

TVHDL,V2 

≈ 3.4×, vs. vectorized (10) where SV2 denotes the speedup performance achieved by the optimized, multi-cycle pipelined architecture variant. Execution latencies are benchmarked directly against the accelerated VHDL core runtime ( TVHDL,V2 = 82 μs). This represents an approximate 1000 × speedup over the unoptimized sequential reference and a 3 .4× speedup over the vectorized NumPy baseline. With an execution latency of 82 μs per sample, the 167 MHz hardware core demonstrates a performance advantage over the CPU running vectorized code in the evaluated setup, while simultaneously achieving a 12 .5× speedup over the ini-tial single-cycle hardware layout (Version 1). This com-parison accounts for the fact that the software baseline relies on the accumulation of thousands of samples into memory to execute simultaneously via parallel SIMD matrix operations. In edge deployments—such as live sensor processing or streaming video—such batching may not be feasible, requiring the CPU to process inputs se-quentially where interpreter and thread context overhead can increase latency. In contrast, the proposed VHDL design operates as a sequential streaming architecture, processing samples individually with a cycle-accurate simulated latency of 82 μs per image, outperforming the batch throughput of the evaluated CPU setup. To empirically validate this streaming constraint on the host platform, an additional software experiment was conducted where the vectorized NumPy core was forced to process the test samples sequentially via an outer loop, thereby disabling the look-ahead batching mechanism. Under this streaming configuration, the evaluated CPU’s execution time is estimated at 375 μs per sample while drawing approximately 51 W of continuous steady-state power. Because the sequential overhead limits the utiliza-tion of the CPU’s wide SIMD registers between iterations, the total computational energy consumed is estimated at 

≈ 0.0191 Joules per sample ( ≈ 52 .3 samples/J). When compared against this non-batched streaming baseline, the custom 167 MHz FPGA accelerator demonstrates an approximate 4 .6× architectural speedup, while achiev-ing a 694 × energy efficiency gain in the evaluated setup. This indicates that when general-purpose architectures are forced to operate under localized edge constraints without offline batching, the spatial computing layout of the specialized SNN hardware offers an operational advantage. Operating at a higher frequency naturally incurs higher dynamic power consumption, estimated at a SAIF-based estimated total on-chip power of 0 .336 W for Version 2 (with a baseline vectorless estimate of 0 .637 W reported solely for structural evaluation consistency with exter-nal works). However, the reduction in execution time improves the overall energy metrics of the system. The energy performance of this multi-cycle optimized core is evaluated using the vector-based metrics as: 

ηV2 = 1

TVHDL,V2 × PV2 

≈ 3.63 × 10 4 samples/J (11) where ηV2 represents the energy efficiency of the op-timized, multi-cycle pipelined accelerator core. This performance metric is derived using the previously de-fined operational latency TVHDL,V2 alongside the corre-sponding post-implementation total power dissipation (PV2 = 0 .336 W), yielding a peak operational efficiency of approximately 36 , 300 samples/J. To evaluate both the internal microarchitectural im-provements and the cross-domain aspects of shifting to custom neuromorphic spatial fabrics, the relative energy efficiency gains are presented in Equation 12: 

ηgain =



ηV2 

ηV1 

≈ 6.6×, vs. V1 baseline 

ηV2 

ηCPU,opt 

≈ 493 ×, vs. vectorized CPU (12) where ηgain represents the relative energy efficiency scal-ing factor achieved by the pipelined execution model. The optimized multi-cycle design is therefore estimated to operate more than six times as efficiently as its un-pipelined hardware predecessor in the evaluated setup. Furthermore, when compared against the optimized par-allel software baseline, the custom VHDL core demon-strates an approximate 493 × aggregate energy-efficiency gain, indicating that specialized edge neuromorphic ac-celerators can deliver the required inference throughput while operating below the sustained high-power bound-aries (49 W − 56 W) of the evaluated general-purpose von Neumann computing architecture. The design also maintains a low resource footprint across the AMD Artix-7 fabric [20]. Post-implementation utilization metrics reveal that the SNN architecture con-sumes 12% of the available Look-Up Tables (LUTs) and 3% of the Flip-Flops (FFs) on the Artix-7 device. This is lower than the previous design’s 13% LUT utilization, in-dicating that pipelining the argmax tree reduced routing 10 Table 4: Cross-Platform Hardware Performance and Efficiency Summary                                                                                              

> Metric / Parameter CPU Baseline (Unopt. Python) CPU Baseline (Vectorized NumPy) Hardware V1 (VHDL Baseline) Hardware V2 (Pipelined VHDL)
> Target Device Platform Intel Core Ultra 9 275HX Intel Core Ultra 9 275HX Artix-7 FPGA Artix-7 FPGA Operating Clock Frequency, fCLK 3.0 GHz 2.85 GHz 13 .3 MHz 167 MHz Target Clock Period, Ttarget ——75 .000 ns 6.000 ns Worst Negative Slack (WNS) ——+2 .023 ns +0 .090 ns Latency per Sample, T84 .00 ms 277 .00 μs1.024 ms 82 .00 μsSpeedup Factor, Srel (vs. Unopt. CPU) 1.0×3.0×10 2×82 .0×1.02 ×10 3×
> Speedup Factor, Srel (vs. Vectorized CPU) 0.003 ×1.0×0.27 ×3.4×
> Speedup Factor, Srel (vs. Hardware V1) ——1.0×12 .5×
> Core Power Dissipation, P56 .00 W 49 .00 W 0.177 W 0.336 W Estimated Batch Energy, Ebatch (10 3samples) 4700 .0 J 13 .6 J 0.18 J 0.028 J Estimated Energy Efficiency, η0.213 samples/J 73 .68 samples/J 5.52 ×10 3smpl/J 3.63 ×10 4smpl/J Efficiency Gain, ηgain (vs. Unopt. CPU) 1.0×3.46 ×10 2×2.60 ×10 4×1.70 ×10 5×
> Efficiency Gain, ηgain (vs. Vectorized CPU) 0.003 ×1.0×75 .0×493 .0×
> Microarchitectural Efficiency Gain ( ηV2 /η V1 )——1.0×6.6×

congestion while improving both clock speed and spa-tial efficiency. Furthermore, this optimization preserves the 0% utilization of physical block RAM (BRAM) tiles observed in the baseline design. All quantized weights and dynamic neuron states remain contained within the localized memory buffers mapped to the distributed logic fabric. This indicates that the transition to a sequential, multi-cycle argmax control path yields its timing closure and spatial advantages without introducing additional resource overheads or dual-port memory access bottle-necks. This level of utilization demonstrates the spatial efficiency of the multi-cycle redesign, providing available resources for larger network scales on the same device, as detailed in the spatial floorplan views in Appendix B. To explicitly isolate the effects of the proposed mi-croarchitectural changes, Table 4 serves as an ablation comparison between the baseline single-cycle readout (Version 1) and the multi-cycle pipelined FSM readout (Version 2). The replacement of the wide combinational argmax tree with a temporal, multi-cycle FSM is the sole structural difference between these two hardware iter-ations. This single modification directly alleviated the system’s critical path bottleneck, enabling the maximum clock frequency to scale from 13.3 MHz to 167 MHz and thereby reducing per-sample execution latency from 1.024 ms to 82 μs. Furthermore, while operating at a higher frequency naturally increased the SAIF-based estimated on-chip power from 0.177 W to 0.336 W, the drastic reduction in execution time ultimately yielded a 6 .6×

improvement in estimated energy efficiency per sample. Spatially, transitioning from a fully unrolled comparator tree to a sequential, single-comparator FSM reduced over-all LUT utilization from 12.72% to 11.95% by eliminating significant interconnect routing congestion. 

4.4 Comparison with State-of-the-Art FPGA SNN Accelerators 

When evaluated against contemporary Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) implementations, the proposed architec-ture demonstrates a trade-off in processing latency and estimated energy efficiency. Table 5 summarizes the per-formance metrics of our proposed architecture alongside existing implementations, highlighting the differences in implementation platforms and evaluation methodologies. It should be noted that target platforms, network topolo-gies, datasets, and power-measurement methodologies differ across the evaluated literature. Consequently, the performance comparison presented in this section is in-dicative within the evaluated setup rather than strictly controlled. The 2024 Spiker+ framework by Carpegna et al. [21] introduced a library of “lean” neuron blocks designed for modern FPGA and System-on-Chip (SoC) architectures. Operating at 100 MHz on an AMD Xilinx Zynq-7020 device (a 28 nm process node), this framework achieves a classification accuracy of 93.85% with an inference latency of 780 μs and an estimated energy consumption of 0.14 mJ per image (vectorless). Comparisons can also be made with architectures featuring alternative hardware scheduling and learning paradigms. The 2021 adaptive clock/event-driven pro-cessor with on-chip STDP capability proposed by Li et al. [22] utilizes a multi-layer topology operating at 100 MHz on a Virtex-7 FPGA (a 28 nm process node). Their implementation reports an inference latency of 3.15 ms, an estimated vectorless energy profile of 5.04 mJ per image, and an MNIST classification accuracy of 92.93%. The proposed multi-cycle architecture (Version 2) uti-lizes a synchronous execution path designed for feedfor-ward inference. Operating at a clock frequency of 167 MHz on a 28 nm Artix-7 device, it processes a single digit over 16 timesteps in a cycle-accurate simulated latency of 82 μs. This represents an approximate 9.5 × reduction in latency compared to the Spiker+ framework and a 38 × reduction compared to the model by Li et al. By mapping synaptic weights into localized internal memory buffers and using a hidden layer of 64 neurons, the de-sign minimizes routing complexity. The resulting energy consumption per inference is estimated at 0.053 mJ us-ing vectorless metrics and 0.028 mJ using vector-based (SAIF) telemetry. Furthermore, the design achieves a classification accuracy of 96.70%, compared to the 92.93% reported by Li et al. 11 Table 5: Comparison of MNIST SNN Inference Accelerators on Programmable Logic 

Metric Proposed Work (Version 2) Li et al. (2021) Carpegna et al. (2024) Harmeling et al. (2026) 

FPGA Process Node 28 nm 28 nm 28 nm 28 nm Device Family Artix-7 Virtex-7 Zynq-7000 Artix-7 Network Topology 784 − 64 − 10 784 − 200 − 100 − 10 784 − 128 − 10 784 − 100 − 10 Neuron Model LIF LIF LIF SRC Timestep Count ( T ) 16 − 100 220 Input Encoding Rate Coding Rate Coding Poisson Rate Bernoulli Rate Test Set Evaluated Full (10k) Full (10k) Full (10k) Full (10k) Clock Frequency 167 MHz 100 MHz 100 MHz 100 MHz Accuracy (MNIST) 96 .70% 92 .93% 93 .85% 96 .31% Latency per Image 82 μs 3.15 ms 780 μs 1.748 ms Energy per Image (Vectorless) 0.053 mJ 5.04 mJ 0.14 mJ 1.972 mJ Energy per Image (Vector_based SAIF) 0.028 mJ − − −

The proposed design can also be evaluated against implementations that employ biologically rich models. A 2026 implementation by Harmeling et al. [23] evalu-ated Spiking Recurrent Cells (SRC) on an Artix-7 FPGA. Their model utilizes recurrent loops and multi-step dy-namics to achieve continuous temporal spike profiles. Their reported cell configuration achieves an MNIST classification accuracy of 96 .31%, with an inference la-tency of 1 .748 ms and an estimated 1 .972 mJ of vectorless energy per digit. The proposed core demonstrates an approximate 21 ×

reduction in inference latency compared to this recurrent architecture, while achieving a 0 .39% higher classifica-tion accuracy and a lower estimated vectorless energy consumption. Implementing the reduction operation as a synchronous, pipelined sequential argmax Finite State Machine (FSM) instead of a wide, combinational reduc-tion tree reduces routing complexity. By breaking the combinational delay paths into discrete timing bound-aries, the architecture enables an operating frequency of 167 MHz on the Artix-7 fabric, improving throughput and energy metrics compared to the alternative hardware implementations. 

# 5 Conclusion 

5.1 Architectural Extensions and Future Improvements 

5.1.1 Frequency Scaling and Arithmetic Pipelin-ing 

While the current multi-cycle optimization achieves tim-ing closure at a target clock period of 6 ns ( Fmax ≈

167 MHz), increasing the operating frequency above 200 MHz requires reducing the clock period to 5 ns or below. Physical synthesis and timing analysis indicate that at this frequency threshold, the primary critical path shifts from the classification logic to the combinational arithmetic within the Leaky Integrate-and-Fire module. Specifically, the back-to-back calculation of the leak decay and synaptic current integration—defined by the integer expression in Equation 2—increases propagation delay within a single clock cycle. To address this timing path, future implementations can incorporate microarchitec-tural pipelining within the neuron’s core. By inserting intermediate synchronous registers to decouple the arith-metic right-shift subtraction from the subsequent 32-bit synaptic current accumulation, the combinational path delay can be reduced, enabling operation above 200 MHz. 

5.1.2 Preempting the Secondary Bottleneck: Dual-Track Parallel Argmax 

Once the arithmetic path of the LIF neurons is pipelined, synthesis indicates that the sequential readout may be-come the next timing bottleneck. The current Version 2 design utilizes a two-stage sequential control approach: it evaluates the 10 output channels over a 10-cycle window to determine spike counts and conditionally initiates an additional 10-cycle loop to evaluate sub-threshold mem-brane potentials if no spikes are recorded. This approach results in an execution latency of up to 22 clock cycles. To bound the execution latency to a fixed 10-cycle window, a Dual-Track Parallel Argmax Engine is intro-duced. Instead of executing the two evaluation sweeps sequentially, this architecture processes both metrics con-currently. In each clock cycle i, the engine compares the incoming channel spike counts ( Si vs. SLspk ) and the terminal membrane potentials ( Vi[T ] vs. VLpot [T ]). Two independent tracking registers evaluate these paths across the 10-cycle sweep to update the running spike label index ( Lspk ) and potential label index ( Lpot ), as formalized in Equations 13 and 14: 12 Lspk ←

{

i, if Si > S Lspk 

Lspk , otherwise (13) 

Lpot ←

{

i, if Vi[T ] > V Lpot [T ]

Lpot , otherwise (14) At the end of the 10th clock cycle, a global zero-spike detection flag evaluates the total layer activity ∑ Sk

to select the final predicted label index ( Lpred ) via a hardware multiplexer structure: 

Lpred ←



Lspk , if ∑ Sk > 0

Lpot , if ∑ Sk = 0 (15) This approach introduces a microarchitectural trade-off: evaluating two parallel inequalities concurrently increases the combinational workload and the physical Look-Up Table (LUT) logic depth within the argmax module. How-ever, when combined with the proposed neuron arithmetic pipelining, this localized increase in logic depth does not affect the global critical path. This dual-track strategy eliminates the conditional 10-cycle overhead, ensuring a deterministic classification window. 

5.1.3 Ultra-High-Frequency Scaling: Syn-chronous Logarithmic Binary Tree Reduction 

For higher operating frequencies where a sequential com-parator restricts the master clock edge, the execution window of the argmax unit can be compressed from 10 clock cycles down to 4 cycles. This is achieved by re-structuring the 10-element sweep into a Synchronous Logarithmic Binary Tree Reduction network. Instead of evaluating channels sequentially, the 10 chan-nels are grouped into five pairs during the first clock cycle. Parallel comparators evaluate these pairs simultaneously, and on the subsequent clock edge, the five intermediate winners are registered into pipeline registers. These win-ners are then paired again to recursively reduce the pool until the global maximum index is determined. Substituting the O(N ) linear complexity with an 

O(log 2 N ) binary reduction tree minimizes the process-ing latency of the classification stage. This architectural shift introduces a hardware trade-off, increasing resource utilization and routing density on the FPGA fabric due to the concurrent instantiation of parallel comparators. However, by restructuring an unrolled spatial tree into a synchronously registered pipeline, the critical path is bounded to a single comparator stage. This ensures the classification engine can keep pace with the neuron pro-cessing pipelines, enabling higher operating frequencies for neuromorphic edge accelerators. 

5.2 Limitations and Boundary Condi-tions 

The current limitations of this work are summarized below to define the scope of the evaluation and guide future work: • Dataset scope: The evaluation is currently lim-ited to the standard MNIST dataset. Extending the microarchitectural validation to more complex or natively neuromorphic benchmarks (e.g., Fashion-MNIST, N-MNIST, and DVS-Gesture) is a key ob-jective. • Inference-only: The architecture supports forward inference exclusively; on-chip or online learning is not supported. • Simulation-based power estimation: While the power and energy metrics utilize post-implementation vector-based SAIF profiles generated from behavioral simulation, these represent CAD-estimated values rather than direct physical board-level silicon measurements. • Scalability: Time-multiplexed execution scales lin-early with input size and timesteps, which may limit inference throughput for significantly larger models. • Coding scheme: The rate coding mechanism can be inefficient for sparse, event-based workloads where temporal or rank-order coding would better exploit data sparsity. • Deployment pipeline: Data and weights are loaded at compile time via VHDL impure functions; a complete runtime deployment pipeline with exter-nal memory or host streaming interfaces is not yet implemented. 

5.3 Concluding Remarks 

This work presents the design, optimization, and FPGA implementation of an inference-only Spiking Neural Net-work (SNN) for MNIST classification on an AMD Artix-7 FPGA platform. By utilizing an integer-driven Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) neuron model with 32-bit regis-ters, the architecture avoids overflow hazards and matches the software reference model without requiring neuron or synapse pruning. To mitigate physical routing con-straints and combinational delays, a centralized Finite State Machine (FSM) controller manages a serialized 1-bit input spike distribution network mapped to local memory buffers. The principal novelty of this work is the holistic inte-gration of these subsystems into a cohesive neuromorphic pipeline. As a key enabler of this integrated architecture, the transition from a single-cycle combinational argmax tree (Version 1) to a multi-cycle sequential argmax unit (Version 2) eliminates the dominant readout bottleneck. 13 This optimization achieves timing closure, improving the Worst Negative Slack (WNS) from −49 .380 ns to +0 .090 ns at a maximum frequency ( Fmax ) of 167 MHz. At this frequency, the core processes a single sample in 82 μs (0 .082 s per 1,000-sample batch), representing an approximately 1000 × speedup over the sequential Python reference and a ≈ 3.4× throughput improvement over a parallelized NumPy baseline. While the software baseline requires batch processing to maximize hardware utilization, the custom VHDL core operates as a real-time streaming architecture, processing inputs sample-by-sample with a latency of ≈ 82 μs per image; however, it is important to note that this execution time scales linearly with input size and the number of operational timesteps. Although operating at a higher frequency increases the total on-chip power to 0 .336 W (compared to a baseline vectorless estimate of 0 .637 W), the reduced latency im-proves estimated energy efficiency by over 6 .6× compared to Version 1, achieving an estimated ≈ 36300 samples/J. Compared to the parallelized NumPy execution on a CPU drawing 49 W, the hardware architecture achieves a ≈ 493 × energy-efficiency gain, demonstrating the ef-ficiency of specialized edge neuromorphic accelerators over conventional von Neumann computing systems. The design is suitable for real-world streaming applications where data batching is impractical. Combined with a low resource footprint consuming 12% of available LUTs and 3% of Flip-Flops, the core maintains a classification accuracy of 96 .70% ± 0.04% across five random seeds on the 10,000-sample MNIST test set. Overall, this work demonstrates that low-cost, spa-tial neuromorphic hardware can deliver high computa-tional throughput per Watt within embedded stream-ing constraints. This efficiency is rigorously validated by the Vivado post-implementation power estimates and post-implementation timing analyses detailed in Section 4. By mitigating routing congestion via time-multiplexed spike broadcasting and eliminating the read-out critical path through multi-cycle pipelining, the pro-posed microarchitecture establishes a spatially efficient paradigm for real-time edge intelligence on resource-constrained programmable fabrics, carefully balancing parallel throughput with the latency trade-offs inherent to time-multiplexing. 

# Code and Data Availability 

To support experimental reproducibility and fa-cilitate transparent verification of the reported hardware metrics, the complete implementation framework developed in this study is publicly ac-cessible at https://github.com/RezaAnsari471/ SNN-TimeMultiplexed-Pipelined-Accelerator .

# Appendix A: Comprehensive Power Analysis Reports 

This appendix presents the complete post-implementation power analysis reports generated via the AMD Vivado Design Suite. To accurately capture the sparse, event-driven nature of the proposed Spiking Neural Network, power dissipation is evaluated using both default vector-less estimation and vector-based profiling driven by a Switching Activity Interchange Format (.saif) simulation. The visual power distribution summaries are provided in Figure 7. The top row depicts the analysis for the base-line non-pipelined architecture (V1), while the bottom row illustrates the optimized multi-cycle pipelined archi-tecture (V2). Each row contrasts the baseline vectorless estimation against the vector-based behavioral profiling. A detailed numerical breakdown of these operating con-ditions is summarized in Table 6. The data highlights the critical importance of vector-based analysis when evalu-ating neuromorphic hardware on FPGAs. For instance, in the optimized V2 architecture operating at 167 MHz, the default vectorless estimation predicts a total on-chip power of 0.637 W, driven largely by an overestimated dy-namic logic power dissipation of 0.241 W. However, when actual event-driven switching activity is applied via the SAIF profile, the total power drops by nearly half to 0.336 W. This reduction is primarily due to dynamic power scaling down from 0.498 W to 0.197 W, reflecting the inherent sparsity of SNN execution where inactive neu-rons and untriggered synapses bypass integration steps. Across both architectural versions, static power dissipa-tion remains firmly bounded between 0.138 W and 0.140 W, demonstrating that the structural pipelining applied to the argmax unit in Version 2 improves the maximum frequency without incurring static leakage penalties on the Artix-7 fabric. Table 6: Detailed On-Chip Power Consumption Break-down (Vivado Post-Implementation)                                 

> Metric V1 (13.3 MHz) Vectorless V1 (13.3 MHz) Vector-based (SAIF) V2 (167 MHz) Vectorless V2 (167 MHz) Vector-based (SAIF)
> Total (W) 0.164 0.177 0.637 0.336 Dynamic (W) 0.026 0.039 0.498 0.197 Static (W) 0.138 0.138 0.140 0.139 Clocks (W) 0.002 0.002 0.065 0.062 Signals (W) 0.009 0.013 0.187 0.052 Logic (W) 0.014 0.023 0.241 0.081 I/O (W) <0.001 <0.001 0.005 <0.001

# Appendix B: Post-Implementation FPGA Device Floorplans References 

[1] K. Roy, A. Jaiswal, and P. Panda, “Towards spike-based machine intelligence with spiking neural net-works,” Nature , vol. 575, no. 7784, pp. 607–617, 2019. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1677-2. 14 (a) V1: Vectorless Es-timation 

> (b) V1: Vector-Based (SAIF) Profiling
> (c) V2: Vectorless Es-timation
> (d) V2: Vector-Based (SAIF) Profiling

Figure 7: Post-implementation power analysis results reported by Vivado. 

> (a) Version 1 Design
> (b) Version 2 Design

Figure 8: Physical layout footprints of V1 and V2 archi-tectures. [2] M. Davies et al., “Loihi: A neuromorphic manycore processor with on-chip learning,” IEEE Micro , vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 82–99, 2018. [3] A. Pourtaherian et al., “An efficient FPGA-based accelerator for spiking neural networks,” in Pro-ceedings of the International Conference on Field-Programmable Logic and Applications (FPL) , pp. 274– 281, 2018. [4] P. U. Diehl, D. Neil, J. Binas, M. Cook, S. C. Liu, and M. Pfeiffer, “Fast-classifying, high-accuracy spiking deep networks through weight and threshold balanc-ing,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) , pp. 1–8, 2015. [5] D. Neil and S. C. S. Liu, “Minitaur: An event-driven FPGA accelerator for spiking neural networks,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems , vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 2421–2428, 2014. [6] J. A. Perez-Carrasco et al., “Mapping from computer vision to evolutionary core-designed spiking neural networks: A systematic approach,” IEEE Transac-tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 706–719, 2013. [7] G. Khodabandehloo, M. Mirhassani, and M. Ahmadi, “A pipelined high-speed hardware architecture for spik-ing neural networks,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers , vol. 65, no. 9, pp. 2902– 2913, 2018. [8] S. Han, H. Mao, and W. J. Dally, “Deep compres-sion: Compressing deep neural networks with pruning, trained quantization and huffman coding,” in Pro-ceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2016. [9] E. Hunsberger and C. Eliasmith, “Spiking deep networks with LIF neurons,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.08829 , 2015. [10] S. Thorpe, A. Delorme, and R. VanRullen, “Spike-based strategies for rapid processing,” Neural Net-works , vol. 14, no. 6-7, pp. 715–725, 2001. [11] N. Rathi and K. Roy, “What I need is ultra-low latency: Optimizing threshold and leak dynamics in spiking neural networks,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 1510–1521, 2021. [12] W. Guo, M. E. Fouda, A. M. Eltawil, and K. N. Salama, “Neural coding in spiking neural net-works: A comparative study for robust neuromor-phic systems,” Frontiers in Neuroscience , vol. 15, p. 638474, 2021. 15 [13] A. Cassidy et al., “Cognitive computing building block: A versatile and efficient digital neuron model for neurosynaptic cores,” in Proceedings of the In-ternational Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) , pp. 1–10, 2013. [14] S. Hauck and A. DeHon, Reconfigurable Computing: The Theory and Practice of FPGA-Based Computa-tion , Morgan Kaufmann, 2007. [15] C. Zhang, P. Li, G. Sun, Y. Guan, B. Xiao, and J. Cong, “Optimizing FPGA-based accelerator design for deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proceed-ings of the ACM/SIGDA International Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays , pp. 161–170, 2015. [16] Pong P. Chu, RTL Hardware Design Using VHDL: Coding for Efficiency, Portability, and Scalability ,John Wiley & Sons, 2006. [17] REALiX v.o.s., “HWiNFO64: Hardware Infor-mation, Diagnostic and Analysis Software,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.hwinfo.com . [Ac-cessed: July 2026]. [18] Intel Corporation, Intel 64 and IA-32 Architec-tures Optimization Reference Manual , Order Number: 248966-046. Santa Clara, CA, USA: Intel Corp., 2023. [19] P. A. Merolla et al., “A million spiking-neuron inte-grated circuit with a scalable communication network and interface,” Science , vol. 345, no. 6197, pp. 668– 673, 2014. [20] S. López-Asunción and P. Ituero, “Enabling Efficient On-Edge Spiking Neural Network Acceleration with Highly Flexible FPGA Architectures,” Electronics ,vol. 13, no. 6, p. 1074, 2024. doi: 10.3390/electron-ics13061074. [21] A. Carpegna, A. Savino, and S. Di Carlo, “Spiker+: A framework for the generation of efficient spiking neural networks FPGA accelerators for inference at the edge,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing , pp. 1–15, 2024. https://doi.org/10. 1109/TETC.2024.3511676 

[22] S. Li, X. Wang, W. Zuo, H. Yang, and Y. Liu, “A Fast and Energy-Efficient SNN Processor With Adap-tive Clock/Event-Driven Computation Scheme and Online Learning,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers , vol. 68, no. 4, pp. 1543– 1552, Apr. 2021. doi: 10.1109/TCSI.2021.3057583. [23] P. Harmeling, F. De Geeter, and G. Drion, “Energy-efficient implementation of spiking recurrent cells on FPGA,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.10679 , 2026. 16